The bars to good care

A growing prison population, staff shortages, and inmates’ drug misuse are just some of the acute challenges for the doctors trying to deliver high-quality care

Health and wellbeing are probably not the first things that would come to most people’s minds when considering prisons and their role in society.

With a prison population of 81,000, England, Wales and Scotland have the highest incarceration rates of inmates per 100,000 of population in western Europe, while the total number of inmates in UK prisons is predicted to rise to 97,000 by 2025.

Despite its large and growing population, those imprisoned in the UK should receive equivalent standards in healthcare to those in society.

This ambition is further complicated by the fact that those in the prison population often tend to be in poorer health than those in society.

A report published by the Nuffield Trust in October last year examining the challenges around healthcare access in prison, found many people entering prison have complex health issues concerning mental health and addiction.

GP Mark Pickering has spent the past 13 years of his career working in prisons and secure psychiatric hospitals. He is one of a relatively small number of doctors responsible for assessing, referring and providing care to inmates in the closely controlled yet often challenging environment of the prison estate.

‘One of the things that often strikes you is that every prison is sort of very different and set in its ways and yet there are these common themes across them,’ he says.

‘There’s so many logistical barriers to good care [in prison] so while we talk about equivalence of care, that you’re meant to be trying to give [inmates] the same range and standard of care that you would give in the community, it’s often very difficult to do that.’

Segregation
With UK prisons spanning a broad range, from maximum security to open facilities, experiences of the doctors working in them, and the resources available to them, can vary, thus making a ‘typical day’ hard to define.

Dr Pickering says as well as running clinics similar to what might be expected in a community GP setting, another critical responsibility of doctors working in a prison is monitoring and assessing those inmates confined to a segregation unit.

‘If the prisoners are in segregation for fighting or trading drugs or something like that, then they have to be seen by a doctor every 72 hours, regardless of whether there’s anything wrong,’ he explains.

‘There’s always a challenge as the doctor because often you’re traipsing around with a prison officer and in some places, they don’t want to open the [cell] doors, so you might just be looking through the door flap and asking the inmate if they’re OK. The rules say you’re meant to assess their physical and emotional and mental state, but how can you do that through a closed door?’

There’s so many logistical barriers to good care in prison
Dr Pickering
Personal safety is a consideration likely to preoccupy anyone entering a prison for the first time and may be a factor deterring some doctors from even entertaining the idea of working in a secure environment.

In his experience, however, Dr Pickering says there are misconceptions as to the safety risk of his job. ‘You’re generally much safer working in a prison than you are walking through the town centre on a Saturday night,’ he says.

‘There are things you’ve got to be alert to, you’re meant to put the patient further away from the door than you so that if they do get aggressive you can exit quickly, and you’ve got panic buttons in the room.

‘It’s a much more controlled environment and there are always prison officers around and risk assessments being done.’

Complicating factors
One of the most significant challenges facing doctors working in prisons is the almost constant requirement to balance the health needs of inmates with the limitations imposed by shortages in prison officer staffing.

This balancing act is often most acutely felt when doctors believe that an inmate might or indeed should be referred to secondary-care services outside the prison. Using the example of an inmate attending a clinic with an injured hand after punching a wall, Dr Pickering outlines the number of factors that might need to be considered before reaching a clinical decision.

‘[In the community] you’d just say, “Pop down to A&E and go and get it checked out”, but in prison you first have to consider things like, has the inmate done this deliberately so that they can try to get out of the prison as part of an escape attempt?,’ he says.

‘You may say to someone that they should probably go to A&E for the chest pain that they’re suffering, but it’s not a simple case of them just going to A&E. They have to get handcuffed, strip searched, and then get taken out handcuffed to a couple of officers and perhaps wait around like that for hours.

‘Sometimes you really do have to think quite laterally, and you’re having to make some of these prioritisation decisions that you just wouldn’t have to make normally [in the community].’ This difficult balancing act is one that prison doctor Amanda Brown knows only too well.

 

Outpatient requirements
Having started out in a traditional community-based general practice role, Dr Brown has spent the past 18 years working in a variety of men’s and women’s prisons in England.

She says that on more than one occasion during her career as a prison doctor she has found herself being ‘cross-examined’ by a prison governor and essentially asked to justify her request that a particular inmate be transferred to hospital for treatment.

‘Probably the most frustrating thing for me is referring patients to outside appointments,’ she says. ‘Certainly [at] Wormwood Scrubs it could be so tricky to get patients out to important outpatient appointments. And I can remember for example, there was a man in there for quite a long time with renal failure and three times a week he had to go for dialysis.

So that took a precious resource, at least two prison officers to escort him. ‘Depending on the risk of the prisoner, it could take two or three officers to escort someone to hospital, which obviously cuts out the staff for the running of the prison.’

Responsibility for the commissioning of primary and public healthcare services in prisons was transferred from the Home Office to the NHS in 2006, although from this year services could also be commissioned by ICS (integrated care systems).

The rules say you’re meant to assess their physical and emotional and mental state, but how can you do that through a closed door?
Dr Pickering

The range of health services available to inmates can vary hugely from prison to prison, with some prisons possessing on-site secondary care facilities such as dialysis or sonography.

Dr Brown’s place of work, HMP Bronzefield, offers a range of healthcare services including physiotherapy, podiatry, dentistry, mental health and an optician. As a remand prison, however, the patient population at Bronzefield can often prove to be a fairly transient one, with inmates only staying for a few weeks before being released or transferred.

Dr Brown says that delivering continuity of care to patients under such circumstances can be extremely challenging. ‘A woman might, for example, have just got to the point where she’s going to have a hip replacement. She then comes to prison for maybe six weeks or two months, so she’s lost that slot [for the operation].

‘If she’s going to be in prison for a long time, we’d have to re-refer them to a local hospital which means they then go to the back of the queue. [Alternatively] we might refer a patient and get an appointment through the day after they’ve been released.’

Awash with drugs
Addiction and the use of drugs by those in custody is a health issue that even those who have never set foot inside a prison are likely to be well aware of.

In its most recent report into prison health, the Commons health and social care committee notes that 28 per cent of men and 42 per cent of women prisoners report having a drug problem upon arrival in prison with 13 and 8 per cent developing issues with substances while incarcerated.

Jake Hard has spent 16 years working as a GP in prisons in England and Wales. Now clinical director at HMP Cardiff he also serves as an expert witness on healthcare in prisons and is the former chair of the Royal College of GPs’ secure environments group, a multidisciplinary UK-wide network promoting access to high standards of care for those detained by the justice system.

Having a long-standing clinical interest in treating substance misuse, he gave evidence to the Health and Social Care committee’s inquiry into prison health in 2018 and has seen at first hand the significant harm drugs can have in prisons, on inmates and the health professionals there to care for them.

‘I’ve seen over the years, the implementation of opioid substitution therapies, methadone and buprenorphine and I’ve subsequently seen, with buprenorphine, the considerable illicit trade of buprenorphine in the prison estate which had a significant impact,’ he says.

‘Then we had a substantial issue with the arrival of psychoactive substances within secure settings which was devastating for lots of reasons.’

Probably the most frustrating thing for me is referring patients to outside appointments
Dr Brown
Dr Hard says he witnessed some of the harrowing consequences from psychoactive substances often known as spice.

‘I’ve seen some of the destructive effects on patients of psychoactive substances. I have seen incidences of people suffering self-inflicted injuries as a consequence of using these drugs.

‘Groups of people under the influence and severely intoxicated and cases such as these have a profound impact on healthcare staff and prison staff.

‘One example I can think of was, there was a time when we had about eight people under the influence [of spice] and some were on the floor vomiting and hallucinating or fitting. You can imagine the effect that has on your nursing team resources and your GPs at that point in time.’

COVID’s impact
As with every other part of society, COVID-19 presented huge challenges to prisons, with the day-to-day lives of inmates and in the delivery of healthcare. A modelling exercise conducted by HMPPS (HM Prison and Probation Service) and Public Health England in April 2020 concluded that measures were required to avoid excessive prisoner deaths, which would have been the case if no actions were taken to avoid outbreaks in the prison estate.

In response, the prison service took the step of implementing a series of restrictions to protect the vulnerable patients. This included inmates being locked in their cells for up to 23 hours a day to reduce transmission of the virus.

A study published last year by the HM Inspectorate of Prisons What Happens to Prisoners in a Pandemic? concludes that, while the measures had been effective in reducing cases and deaths, it was unclear what the effect of the strict and extensive period of lockdown may have been on many individuals’ mental health.

Indeed, in its report, the Nuffield Trust reveals a mixed picture as to the pandemic’s effect on mental health in prisons, with the report noting that, while the rate of self-harm per 1,000 men in prison fell by 13 per cent in 2020, it increased by the same percentage in the women’s prison estate.

‘From an infection prevention control point of view, the measures that were put in place were completely understandable and helped to avoid what could have been a significant number of deaths,’ says Dr Hard.

We had a substantial issue with the arrival of psychoactive substances within secure settings
Dr Hard
‘The measures put in place in the prison estate endured for longer than the measures that were seen in the wider community, and this included being locked in their cells for 23 hours a day, but were ultimately intended to minimise the impact of further outbreaks.’

The BMA forensic and secure environments committee is responsible for supporting and improving the conditions of doctors working in prison settings, with the committee planning on holding a special conference next year to this end.

FSEC chair Marcus Bicknell says the pandemic and prevailing challenges mean healthcare standards are still not at the level staff and inmates deserve. He says: ‘Prison remains a challenging place for healthcare workers to deliver care.

'NHS England Health and Justice has adopted a helpful, inclusive partnership approach to improving services, but workforce pressures are extreme, which adversely affects the delivery of safe GP and psychiatric care, and we are a distance away from being able to deliver the quality of health service which we aspire to.’ 

A tale of one city

The cost-of-living crisis is spiralling and Government ministers are proposing further spending cuts and pay restraint in a country which has already been through more than a decade of austerity. Peter Blackburn investigates the effects of budget cuts and squeezed finances on the health of communities in Nottingham

A SPECIAL INVESTIGATION
Garry Lovelock is not a religious man. But when the lonely nights sleeping on the streets, the ‘grubby’ washing in a McDonald's toilet and the endless fines for boarding trains without a ticket become too much he finds himself in church, praying – just hoping for ‘a helping hand’.
The other likely destination on those hopeless nights is the accident and emergency department at Nottingham’s Queen’s Medical Centre.

Mr Lovelock, 41, lost his house and employment after his wife died of leukaemia. When he is emotional and upset he drinks. It is the causal spark of a repetitive cycle in which he is picked up by the police, taken to an emergency department, sees a doctor after sobering up and is told he is fit to go. Not go home, of course. But go.

It is a costly cycle with the average interaction with the emergency department estimated at £297 by the NHS, not to mention the serious mental and physical toll this repetition has on Mr Lovelock, too.

‘There is so much of that – not addressing the root causes and just using sticking plasters [like seeing a doctor in A&E],’ Ann Bremner, who runs The Friary homelessness charity in West Bridgford, Nottingham, where Mr Lovelock has been provided a meal and support with his search for employment, says.

LOVELOCK: Trapped in a harmful cycle
The cycle between the streets and hospital is far from the only one in which the vulnerable are trapped. Others – each as dehumanising as the last – exist, too.

Here at The Friary, there are scores of people who are regulars in other health services or the criminal justice system, for example. A Polish man being given a food parcel is one of those.

He says he ‘lost everything’ because he was convicted of a crime and sent to prison for two weeks. He is now unemployed, and his only routines are going to places like this for food and the regular check-ins with his probation officer. 

‘I came straight from jail to the street,’ the man who asks to be called Grzegorz, says. ‘I have no home, no work and no money.

‘What do they expect me to do? A universal credit application takes at least a month and that means no money for five weeks and I have to start again every time [he is arrested].’

'This is definitely an austerity issue'
Stephen Willott 

A friend, also at The Friary – who asks to be called Pavel – has epilepsy, which is difficult to manage while in and out of hostels or sleeping rough. Stephen Willott, a GP who does sessions with users of The Friary, manages his condition and is a ‘nice guy who does everything for me’ but it is clear Pavel needs significant support.

The Doctor has spent months in communities in Nottingham – meeting health professionals and their patients, people struggling to get by and the charities and organisations trying to hold together what remains of the UK’s disintegrating social safety net. Everywhere the stories have similar themes – services have been pared back to the bone and society is often unable or unwilling to intervene.

The tales of tragedy are everywhere you look. When The Doctor visits The Friary there is a man slumped outside the front doors – knocked out due to heavy use of the synthetic cannabinoid mamba, also known as spice. He has been in and out of an emergency department, crisis teams have been involved but because he has no home the authorities say there is no safe place for them to conduct a mental health assessment.

Instead, he is repeatedly charged with offences, offered no intervention, and continues to use vast amounts of drugs. ‘It’s incredible what he puts his body through,’ Ms Bremner reflects. And Dr Willott adds: ‘This is definitely an austerity issue.’

 

Life expectancy
All of the horrors seen here in this one moment on one day in Nottingham are stark reminders of the deterioration of health in this country. Before the pandemic, life expectancy – a key indicator of the nation’s health – had started to stall for the first time in a century.

For some of the most deprived areas, like many parts of Nottingham, life expectancy was starting to decline – something not witnessed for 120 years. And the amount of time that people spend in poor health has increased, with the gap in healthy life expectancy between the most and least deprived areas now nearly 20 years.

The picture is particularly bleak here in Nottingham. The ONS (Office for National Statistics) recently published a new health index, which scores the health of each part of the country based on a vast analysis of prevalence of conditions, access to services and living conditions. Nottingham is sixth worst out of 340. 

Much of the regression nationally, and locally, is being caused by preventable illness. Relative to comparable countries, the UK has a higher amount of preventable illness, and those numbers are rising.

An estimated 29 million people in the UK are living with one of more long-term health conditions. The number of working-age people in Britain reporting multiple serious health conditions has rocketed by 735,000 in just two years. These figures are often worst in the most deprived communities

I came straight from jail to the street ... I have no home, no work and no money
'Grzegorz'

The evidence suggests this deterioration in health is driven by austerity politics – political and economic decisions taken by successive governments.

Billions of pounds have been cut from public services and social security since 2010, decimating welfare and the social safety net and there are now far fewer services promoting good health.

People are dying younger, as a result, with the poorest areas hit the hardest. According to the Glasgow Centre for Population Health an additional 335,000 deaths have been caused by austerity in the five years before the pandemic – more than from the first two and a half years of Covid-19. 

Cuts to central government funding for local government have meant cuts to public services that are essential to health – including housing, transport, children’s services, leisure and public health. 

For example, spending on housing services and homelessness prevention declined by 50 per cent between 2009 and 2019. Street homelessness rose rapidly during this time, doubling between 2013 and 2018.

The number of homeless people dying also increased during these years and a reduction in funding for housing services is linked to increased deaths from drug misuse, accounting for an additional 1000 deaths between 2013 and 2019.

BREMNER: Root causes of poverty must be addressed
In 2020, The Doctor reported the story of funding cuts and failed procurement processes at an outstanding-rated GP practice in Nottingham which looked after thousands of the most vulnerable and complex patients in the city.

Commissioners wanted to decrease the funding per patient given to the practice – anything from £160 to £211 a head according to NHS digital – to around £110 a patient. The non-profit provider running the surgery said it would lose around £400,000 a year or have to make 40 per cent of staff redundant under the new terms. 

‘It basically just fell foul of austerity,’ Jane Turrill, then lead GP for NEMS, which ran the surgery, tells The Doctor. ‘We got paid more money to look after, to provide the same level of service, to patients who find it difficult to access general practice and for us that was predominantly patients with severe multiple disadvantage.

'Over the years the amount of money that we got per patient was cut back and back and back. We just couldn’t fight a central thrust to move toward that goal of every GP practice getting the same amount per patient across the whole country.’ 

This austerity landscape is brutal for the most vulnerable and their health – but also remarkably complex and challenging even for those who feel able to advocate for themselves.

Jerome Barton had been sleeping in The Arboretum, a small but historic and well-loved park at the heart of the city, for around two months when The Doctor met him. He has qualifications and, until recently, worked in industrial cleaning, but struggled with depression and housing debt and ended up sleeping rough. The father-of-three says: ‘It doesn’t take a lot to fall out [of work and housing].’

If I can get a house, I can get a job
Jerome Barton

For Mr Barton, who was in contact with local authorities and charities over housing, recent months had featured offers of beds in hostels surrounded by drug addicts. He chose to sleep on the streets instead.

‘For people who are clean it isn’t healthy,’ he says. ‘It’s really difficult.’ Mr Barton could hardly be described as picky – he just wants somewhere a roof over his head and access to buses to see his children.

‘If I can get a house, I can get a job - I’m confident about that,’ Mr Barton adds.

Spending on Sure Start declined from £1.8bn in 2010 to £600m by 2017-18
BMA research

When speaking to health professionals, charities, and community groups across this city it is rare a conversation passes without reference to the loss of Sure Start. Spending on the programme declined from £1.8bn in 2010 to £600 million by 2017-18, resulting in over 1,000 Sure Start centre closures.

These closures came despite an IFS evaluation which revealed positive health impacts, including 5,000 fewer hospital admissions of 11-year-olds each year for children who participated, benefiting disadvantaged children the most.

Studies have also shown that cuts in spending on Sure Start have contributed to an increase in childhood obesity. Dr Willott describes Sure Start as ‘one of the very few initiatives that actually reverse the inequality of the poorest getting the rawest deal’.

BARTON: Just wants a roof over his head
This sort of neglect has hit hard across the country, but in few places harder than in St Ann’s – a particularly deprived part of Nottingham which has a tragic history of knife and gun crime.

According to the 2019 ward health profile 37 per cent of adults in this corner of the city smoke, 46 per cent of children in year six are overweight or obese and 38 per cent of children aged zero to 15 years live in poverty.

St Ann’s sits right on the edge of Nottingham city centre but retains a distinct sense of independence and isolation. In the 1960s the Victorian terraces here were knocked down as part of ‘slum clearances’ and replaced with a mazy prefabricated estate.

Just 50 years later this area feels impenetrable and cut-off. The shops at the precinct off the area’s Robin Hood Chase are boarded up and empty. There are precious few signs of life. 

Just one door stands ajar on the precinct when The Doctor visits. A dimly glowing light fleetingly escaping out into the pedestrianised courtyard which the abandoned buildings share.

Inside, two apprentices – Dave Gregory and Fatima Woodward – are stacking tins, packets and vital supplies on shelving units which surround the rooms and corridors within the makeshift foodbank. 

‘I was sitting having Christmas dinner last year when I just thought about people less well off. It got to me and I decided to do some volunteering,’ Mr Gregory, who retired from working in air conditioning and ventilation three years ago, says.

He describes seeing people daily who are ‘at the end of their tether’ – many in employment who you might not expect to see.

‘It’s really sad - you can’t put it into words that are strong enough and it’s getting much worse,’ he adds. ‘The truth is you don’t know how desperate you could easily be.’

Ms Woodward is a single mum and has taken on this apprentice role through a 13-week Government kick-starter scheme after initially volunteering. She has previously worked in hotels, doing housekeeping, but can only work during school hours now.

‘It can be sad,’ she says. ‘It’s quite hard – they are struggling to feed their kids. That is the most desperate moment.’

The foodbank is part of The Chase Neighbourhood Centre – a local charitable success story which has been supporting people in this deprived community since 1997.

Debbie Webster, manager of the centre, is something of a local hero having been involved in the local community since setting up a community group during the difficult 1980s in Thatcher’s Britain.

It started in the pub across the road and now there are 32 paid staff in a purpose-built community hub ‘delivering support to people in crisis’.

'Moving public health to local authorities has had a big impact on what doctors can do'
David Rhinds

‘Sometimes I feel quite pleased, but I wish we didn’t have to have any [staff],’ Ms Webster says. ‘What a sign of the times that is.’ She adds: ‘There’s so much demand. We won’t be able to help everyone and it is getting worse. It’s so worrying. We’re not the solution - we’re the sticking plaster.’

Here at The Chase every opportunity is taken to wrap care and services around people who need help. There are money advice staff, benefits advisors, digital support and language classes available, among many other things. 

Sherealyn McPherson is one of those being supported when The Doctor visits. The 32-year-old mum of one has struggled with a host of mental and physical health problems, including arthritis and anxiety, for many years and is so exhausted and pained by work that looking after her daughter after a shift becomes incredibly difficult.

Staff at The Chase are supporting Ms McPherson with a tribunal around sickness benefits after she felt she needed to leave her last job due to illness. She also gets debt support here. With no money coming in, life is very tough.

‘It’s a real struggle, you just have to try to survive,’ she says. ‘I’m having to consider using the food bank – you get to the end of each month and you just don’t know how you are going to make it work. If it wasn’t for this place fighting for me I would have given up. It does get you down and that’s why my anxiety is so bad now. It all makes me wonder what the world is going to be like for my daughter. I try not to think about it – I’ve got enough on my plate already.’

It all makes me wonder what the world is going to be like for my daughter
Sherealyn McPherson
Speaking about her friends and family, Ms McPherson adds: ‘Everyone is struggling and finding it hard with rent and bills and things. I think we need a more compassionate system.’

Sheila Jones, employment support officer at The Chase, who has been working with deprived communities in Nottingham for 20 years says communities have broken down. She adds: ‘Society needs to invest in people. There are so few things around them… Everything has fallen away.’

Few links between austerity and health are more obvious than in the cuts to the public health grant. With public health moved to local authorities from the NHS in 2012, owing to the Health and Social Care Act, budgets were under even more threat than those in the health service. This has also had the effect of creating silos and fragmenting services.

Nottingham consultant psychiatrist David Rhinds says: ‘It has made a big impact in what we can do as doctors. Before those changes I could see a patient in a clinic, prescribe for them, order investigations and scans and all that sort of thing.’ Now, few of those options are open to Dr Rhinds.

Jane Bethea, public health consultant, who up until recently worked for Nottingham City Council but is now employed by Notts Healthcare, the local mental and community health provider, adds ‘The function of public health was fractured terribly and we’re trying to get that back now – but we’ve got such low capacity… Frontline public health is under massive pressure.’

Tobacco use up
The public health grant has been cut by 24 per cent since 2015/16. Within those cuts stop smoking and tobacco control projects have been cut by 41 per cent, drug and alcohol services by 28 per cent and sexual health services by 23 per cent.

Dr Bethea says the cuts to smoking cessation services, for example, have had a clear impact. ‘You can see that we are actually bucking the trend in Nottingham now, in that smoking prevalence is increasing,’ she says.

Drug and alcohol services have been cut by 28 per cent
BMA research

Cuts have been higher in deprived areas like Nottingham. And those cuts come despite public health interventions being known to provide value for money: each year of good health achieved costs £3,800, compared with more than £13,500 if things are left until they require NHS intervention. Another familiar theme is that every budget cut seems to end up just costing far more down the line.

‘Some of these people I have been seeing for 10 years now,’ Dr Willott says, as The Doctor takes a seat in a consultation room at The Windmill GP Practice in Sneinton, just east of Nottingham City Centre. In the shadow of Green’s Windmill – a working mill built by mathematician George Green in 1807 – this practice runs what is likely the biggest shared care drug clinic in the East Midlands. 

For Dr Willott it is an opportunity to make an immediate impact on the lives of the most vulnerable patients in this city - but the complexity and tragedy of some patients’ lives and the societal breakdown around them means sometimes harm reduction is as much as can be managed. 

GPs warn of a growing prevalence of patients taking crack cocaine alongside heroin
One patient is urged not to purchase the highly addictive and destructive crack cocaine alongside his daily heroin. This two-in-one phenomenon is a growing problem in Nottingham, Dr Willott says.

‘It is maybe the most prevalent now. And it is very dangerous.’ Another patient presents for his ‘pretty significant’ methadone prescription – an insurance policy that should ‘take the chaos’ and the ‘illicit means of getting drugs’ away from his life.

Next, we see a patient whose leg is so swollen the doctor’s fingers leave deep impressions in the flesh when making an assessment. He appears to be in a slight daze and says he has just had some mamba. Asked how he is finding life, he says: ‘It is just getting harder.’

For some people in this city using mamba is the easiest method of escapism. Mamba, in comparison to many drugs, is relatively cheap and it will remove users from full consciousness for a period of time, but Dr Willott says it is largely a ‘pleasureless’ drug where users are just ‘out of it’ rather than having a ‘nice high’. This, many health professionals have said to The Doctor, is among the most depressing indictments on the state of society – that escapism without any pleasure is desired. 

The only time I will get help is when something really bad happens
Homeless patient

After working through patients unable to come to the surgery in person and others seeking prescriptions The Doctor meets a homeless patient who is at his wits' end, having been unable to satisfy any landlords that he could pay their rents with the benefits available to him.

He says: ‘I’ve given up. It’s a waste of time. The only time I will get help is when something really bad happens. Everywhere I go nobody is interested. Maybe they will be when I’m dead.’

Several more patients file in and out. The personal circumstances seem to get bleaker with each visit. One of Dr Willott’s patients – a working-age heroin addict – died two days ago.

And another supplied a urine test which glowed scarlet red in the bottle due to being almost entirely made up of blood. The everyday horrors of many patients’ lives are beyond nightmare for most in society.

Rotten jaw
A final patient for the day arrives. He is happy to talk but is not well. He can’t lift his arm, he has a ‘massive abscess’ on one of his legs and half of his jaw has rotted away. He has just two teeth left.

The patient’s brother died recently after taking mamba. After three years on the streets he now has a flat and found services were more supportive following the death of his brother.

Asked about the future, he says: ‘Life is very tough. Cost of living? It’s the cost of just surviving, more like.’

Reflecting on another day in the clinic, Dr Willott, who is chair of the local drug deaths group, describes the reality of operating in a post-austerity health system with these patients as ‘increasingly brutal with each successive year’.

The patients here are cared for with great compassion and dedication but when housing is so difficult to access, other drug and alcohol services have disappeared and society seems to have forgotten them it is difficult to do much more than manage and cope.

And, sadly, with Dr Willott and his colleagues running these dedicated clinics in Nottingham, these patients are catered for in a way that many around the country are not.

Dr Willott says that 50 per cent of the drug deaths each year are of patients who are not in any treatment whatsoever, and that there is a crisis in people not being engaged with services.

That sense of postcode lottery is familiar across the city at The Level, in Radford, which sits among the relics of what was once the industrial heartbeat of this city – among the former factories that made millions of Raleigh bikes and the famous Player’s tobacco empire.

The Level is run by local housing charity Framework and works in partnership with Nottinghamshire Healthcare NHS Trust and a number of other charities and local organisations.

It was set up in 2018 after the NHS’s substance misuse service, The Woodlands, at the Highbury Hospital in the north of the city, closed down to make financial savings. These sorts of services are now few and far between – patients at The Level come, literally, from right across the country but there are only a small number of beds to go around.

GP Marcus Bicknell, who works there says the 2012 Health and Social Care Act left services vulnerable to budget cuts and describes the impact as ‘massive harm’. There are now only a handful – a count of five in 2020 – of inpatient units in the country and the health service’s addiction psychiatrist workforce has been decimated. 

The traumas stored in people’s lives across this city are immeasurable. Much of that trauma is created in early-life, growing up in communities where poverty is normal and support unheard of. Doctors working at places like The Windmill and The Level already fear for their populations and now the worry of what is to come echoes loudly around the estates in Nottingham.

We’ve seen people with good jobs lose their jobs and their homes
Rachael Graham
Those fears appear to be justified. High inflation, more than 10 per cent in October, is making the cost of living increasingly unaffordable. Lower income households, who are already at a greater risk of ill health, are bearing the brunt of this as cost increases represent a greater share of their income and citizens Advice have reported a tripling of people seeking help because they couldn’t afford both food and energy.

In a grim summary of the situation one homeless person The Doctor meets jokes that the currency energy crisis is perhaps not the worst time to have no home to heat.

Last year, 4.5 million UK households were fuel poor, and this had significant health implications, with England recording an estimated 63,000 excess winter deaths in 2020-21.

Estimates suggest that 10 per cent of excess winter deaths are directly attributable to fuel poverty and 21.5 per cent are attributable to cold homes. Even with the government’s cap on energy costs, NEA (National Energy Action), a charity advocating for everyone to have a warm home, is warning fuel poverty numbers will rise to 6.7 million this winter.

Households with children have the highest prevalence of fuel poverty and cold homes are associated with reduced resistance to respiratory infections, including bronchiolitis, in children. Respiratory illnesses are more than twice as high in children who had lived in cold, damp homes.

In September, 18 per cent – 9.7 million adults – of all households were food insecure, meaning they ate less or went a day without eating because they couldn’t access or afford.

This has more than doubled since January. And one in four households with children have experienced food insecurity in the past month, affecting an estimated 4 million children.

This food insecurity is known to lead to adverse health outcomes – causing both malnutrition and obesity, one of the leading drivers of preventable illness and death, because healthy food, pound for pound, is much more expensive.

The problems with food insecurity are mental as well as physical as the risk of mental ill health from food insecurity is three times that of losing a job.

BICKNELL: Austerity: worst is still to come
During the last financial year, the Trussell Trust supplied 2.2 million three-day emergency parcels - a year-on-year increase of 14 per cent.

At The Chase, Rachel Graham, an advisor and community engagement worker, says the need is so severe now that the centre is overwhelmed, and staff often have to direct people to CAB instead.

‘We’ve seen people with good jobs lose their jobs and their homes,’ she says. ‘For these people to come to a place like this is terrifying. It is also impacting people who are working. We anticipate this winter being a scary time - that question, heat of eat, will become an increasing issue. We are seeing this.’

Doctors across the city are deeply worried. Dr Turrill says: ‘I think it [the cost of living crisis] will push more people into that position [mental health crisis]. 

‘Ultimately, we will have people who are on that teetering edge of being able to cope and, suddenly, they’re not going to be able to cope anymore… You look at the price of food and heating and all that sort of stuff. And we know people’s rents have gone up… that puts people under a massive, massive pressure. I do think it will bring many more people into that arena of being more complex… I think that in terms of sheer numbers it is going to have a big impact.’

And Dr Bicknell adds: ‘I am very worried about this bit of austerity now… the worst is still to come even after everything we have seen. The fact that we’ve had these 12 or 14 years but the worst is still ahead of us is pretty terrifying really. It’s starve or freeze for many.’

It is a stark situation noted by bosses at Nottingham’s hospitals, who reacted to the effects of the cost-of-living crisis and austerity politics on staff in September by providing £2 subsidised hot lunches, with 2,500 bought on average each week.

Austerity, and the inequalities it has driven, have a huge impact on the NHS. There is currently a record of over 7 million people waiting for treatment, including 2.75 million patients waiting over 18 weeks. Last year, waiting lists increased by more than half, 55 per cent, in the most deprived areas, compared to a third in the least. Those in the most deprived areas were almost twice as likely to wait more than a year for treatment compared to those living in the least deprived areas.

The treatment and care of people living with often preventable, long-term conditions are responsible for around 50 per cent of GP appointments and 70 per cent of hospital days. GPs and other healthcare professionals also report that they spend around 20 of their time dealing with issues that are nonmedical but related to social or economic pressures.

We are seeing younger and younger people involved in violent crime
Bob Winter

It is likely higher levels of fuel poverty will make things worse – the NHS will likely incur higher demand and higher costs from its effects.  In 2019, it was estimated the NHS spends at least 2.5bn per year on treating illnesses that are directly linked to cold, damp, and dangerous homes.

And greater food insecurity will also add to pressures. Malnutrition is already estimated to cost the NHS in England £19.6 billion. Obesity related diseases are estimated to cost 6.5 billion each year. There were already more than one million hospital admissions due to obesity in 2019/20. International evidence shows that those experiencing severe food insecurity have health care costs which are 121 per cent higher.

The cost-of-living crisis is also likely to lead to a rise in demand for emergency and mental health care over the coming winter, including an above 10 per cent increase in inpatient mental health admissions and above 5 per cent increases in outpatient mental health contacts, 111 and 999 calls. Above 5 per cent additional funding would be required for mental health and emergency department services to cope. 

It is not just the most obvious links between austerity and health that are causing great strain, though. Bob Winter, worked as medical director for the East Midlands Ambulance Service, National Clinical Director for Critical Care and Emergency and clinical lead in the Emergency Department at Nottingham’s Queen’s Medical Centre during the past decade, retiring just this year.

He says: ‘In hospital we saw an increase in knife crime and an increase in substance misuse. There’s not the safety net and there’s a disengagement of society that didn’t exist before. We are seeing younger and younger people involved in violent crime. If you had told me ten years ago that we would be teaching nightclub doormen and McDonalds staff how to manage a life-threatening haemorrhage, I wouldn’t have believed you… I would have laughed in your face. But that is where we are.’

Critical incident
On top of that, the NHS workforce is depleted and exhausted by more than a decade of working in under-resourced environments, with punitive pension taxes hanging over them and the ever-increasing risks of corridor medicine with patients locked in hospital due to a spiralling crisis in social care. 

The week The Doctor meets Dr Winter, Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust, which runs the city’s QMC and City Hospital, declares a critical incident - an occurrence which was once highly unusual but now seems to be almost normalised. According to an e-mail seen by The Doctor staff were offered 30 per cent incentives to go and do extra shifts, such was the desperation of hospital managers. 

And the week this piece was due to be published The Doctor received an anxious text message from one Nottingham doctor. It said: ‘I have never seen so many sick people waiting in corridors in ED on trolleys. Four corridors full.’

Dr Winter – who jokes that he realised he needed to retire earlier this year when he answered a bleep for a red trauma call in the middle of the night only to realise when he arrived at the hospital that he wasn’t even on call – says: ‘High level alerts are so normal now that you just read the email and shrug. There’s an element of “what do you expect me to do about it?” You get compassion fatigue. My big concern is we are normalising all of this.’

For Dr Winter, investment in the care sector and solving the pensions crisis, which is seeing clinicians give up work to avoid charges of thousands of pounds, are the easiest first steps to turning around some of these problems. He says: ‘I remember not that long ago a four-hour breach had managers jumping up and down. That’s not the case now. We have patients across the board waiting more than 24 hours to be offloaded from an ambulance. There’s nowhere to put the patients.’

MCKEE: Government ministers' policies harm health
Professor Martin McKee, the president of the BMA, says: ‘British doctors are tired. But it’s not just the long hours and heavy workloads. They are tired of picking up the pieces after government ministers whose policies are harming health and placing our NHS under unsustainable pressure.

And now, as ministers seek to balance the books, we face the return to the failed policies of austerity that created many of the problems we face today.

The BMA is calling on the Government to take ‘urgent action’ to halt the decline in the country’s health. Its proposals include upholding commitments to uprating benefits in line with inflation, exploring reforms to social security and wages to ensure both guarantee everyone access to the income they need to stay healthy and well and a commitment to uprating budgets so public services can cope with inflation.

In the longer term, the association is also urging ministers to plan to reverse the damage done by cuts over the last decade, to commit to keeping in place successful policies pledges on the drivers of ill health like the soft drinks levy and to publish and act on a health inequalities strategy that makes health a cross-government policy.

Professor McKee adds: ‘Britain can’t afford to get sicker. When it came to power in 2010 the coalition government chose to implement severe austerity. The first signs of economic recovery following the financial crisis were snuffed out. Government policies left entire communities behind.’

There is a huge amount of work going on across the city in a bid to hold together the remaining fragments of the social safety net and to work with the most deprived and vulnerable communities to improve their health and wellbeing. 

Earlier this year, The Doctor was invited to a meeting of Nottingham’s SMD Partnership – a group of 40 to 50 staff and service users from health and social care, charities and other groups meeting every two weeks – which aims to support people facing a combination of homelessness, substance misuse, domestic abuse, offending and mental ill health.

Boarded-up shops near The Chase
It was a group in which the hope for the future belied the difficult context cities like Nottingham are operating in.

The group has convinced the city council to have SMD as a key priority for the local health and wellbeing plan and political and professional support seems aligned.

Professionals in the city are currently rolling out a programme which aims to see GP surgeries across the area provide enhanced services for the most disadvantaged among their populations and a vast new project, Changing Futures, is aiming to drive system change with these communities in mind.

Dr Bethea chairs the meeting. She says: ‘I think I’m the most optimistic I’ve ever been… and I’m quite a cynic.’ Dr Bethea cites the work of the volunteer and community organisations in the city and the willingness of health and care professionals to work together.

The optimism is much-needed in a city where so much has been lost – and there is so much work to do to protect and improve people’s health, yet so little resource to do it with. 

Back at the Friary, Garry Lovelock is saying his farewells having finished the lunch volunteers have prepared. Despite everything he has been through, Mr Lovelock emanates the sort of positivity which might make most people feel ashamed of their everyday worries and irritations.

When The Doctor says goodbye, Mr Lovelock replies: ‘Why did George Michael have chocolate all over his face? ...Because he was careless with his Wispa.’

Mr Lovelock remains an optimist, who tries to ‘pick people up when they are down’. After more than a decade of austerity, communities in Nottingham are asking when, if ever, the government will be minded to do the same.

Long-term Follow-up After Critical COVID-19

The year 2020 was a grim and uncertain time for any clinician caring for inpatients with COVID-19, especially those with critical illness. In an era of modern medicine in which the range of options for many conditions can seem limitless, this novel viral threat was a reminder of the historical norm in medicine—a struggle to find the best available treatment.

As a stark example of ambiguities and resulting divergent practices during the dark days of early 2020, one of us was an infectious diseases consultant to medical teams caring exclusively for inpatients with COVID-19.1 On one of the teams, all of their patients received adjunctive hydroxychloroquine as part of their admission medications. A second team, doing their daily rounds on the same floor of the hospital, chose the opposite approach—none of their patients received it. Members of both teams could mobilize logical arguments in favor of their practice, while simultaneously acknowledging that they were doing so without high-quality data from randomized clinical trials.

Now, more than 3 years since the first cases of COVID-19, multiple well-conducted studies have served to greatly expand treatment options. Importantly, clinical research has also crossed many ineffective treatments off the list of potential options, including, for the record, hydroxychloroquine.2 Research has breathing room to evolve beyond the “triage” mindset of the early years of the pandemic toward refining treatment approaches and studying more than just mortality and hospitalization. Currently, 2 evidence gaps are particularly large: understanding treatment outcomes beyond a few weeks and measuring not just survival, but also quality of life.

In this issue of JAMA,3 investigators from the international Randomized Embedded Multifactorial Adaptive Platform for Community Acquired Pneumonia (REMAP-CAP) consortium make a substantial step toward closing these evidence gaps through a prespecified secondary analysis of their previously published randomized clinical trials. Using an adaptive study design,4 the REMAP-CAP trial evaluated 6 treatment classes for 4689 patients admitted to the intensive care unit with COVID-19 from March 2020 through June 2021. Most notable among their initial trial findings was a substantial clinical benefit, including short-term 21-day survival, of the IL-6 receptor antagonists tocilizumab and sarilumab.5 These results contributed to the inclusion of this strategy in treatment guidelines for COVID-19 among critically ill patients.6 Anticoagulation with heparin in noncritical disease of moderate severity (but not in critical disease) also improved outcomes,7 but none of the other tested therapies yielded favorable results.

The present analysis extends the 21-day primary outcome horizon of the previous trials to evaluate 180-day mortality (the primary outcome), 180-day quality of life measured through the 5-level EuroQol-5 Dimension (EQ-5D-5L) score, and 180-day disability using the 12-item World Health Organization Disability Assessment Schedule. The 6 pragmatic trials had varying treatment and control groups. The randomized groupings were a fixed 7-day course of intravenous hydrocortisone, a shock-dependent course, or no steroids; 1 of 2 IL-6 receptor antagonists, interferon beta-1a, or no immune modulator; lopinavir-ritonavir, hydroxychloroquine, a combination of the 2, or no proposed antiviral treatment; convalescent plasma treatment, delayed treatment, or no plasma; therapeutic-dose or thromboprophylaxis-dose heparin; and aspirin, a P2Y12 inhibitor (eg, clopidogrel), or no antiplatelet agent. Notably absent from this list of interventions is remdesivir, the only antiviral that is approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for inpatient treatment of COVID-19 to date. Such an exclusion is unlikely to invalidate these results because there is limited evidence for benefit of this drug in critical illness,8 which contrasts with clear efficacy when given earlier and in milder stages of the disease.9

Several unique aspects of this analysis deserve emphasis as one considers the results. The REMAP-CAP trial was an ambitious and forward-looking “perpetual platform trial,” initially organized in 2016 with an explicit purpose to provide rapid evidence in a pandemic.10 In the earliest days of the COVID-19 pandemic, the collaboration sprang into action and expanded to 197 international sites using this adaptable research platform. Another distinctive quality of the REMAP-CAP studies was their focus on pragmatic interventions, whose goal was to “replace random variation in treatment with randomized variation in treatment,” thereby embedding trials into routine care delivery. This was coupled with a sophisticated statistical framework using bayesian methods particularly well suited to deliver meaningful, time-sensitive evidence. Finally, the authors had the foresight to prespecify quality of life outcomes in their adaptive platform, enabling the important secondary outcomes in this study. The investigators deserve the highest praise for executing an expansive, forward-thinking initiative that has produced a wealth of evidence under intense pressure.

One of the main findings is unlikely to surprise readers aware of the short-term results of the REMAP-CAP trial and the current treatment guidelines for COVID-19. For the primary outcome of 180-day mortality, IL-6 receptor antagonists (tocilizumab or sarilumab) again demonstrated a very high probability of superiority (adjusted hazard ratio, 0.74 [95% credible interval {CrI}, 0.61-0.90]; >99.9% probability of superiority vs placebo). This 180-day outcome provides reassurance that early mortality benefit from IL-6 receptor antagonists did not result in longer-term adverse outcomes, such as susceptibility to late-onset opportunistic or other infections, that would offset short-term benefits.

Somewhat surprisingly given the negative results from the 21-day analysis,11 antiplatelet agents (aspirin or P2Y12 inhibitors) also demonstrated a high likelihood of improving 180-day mortality (adjusted hazard ratio, 0.85 [95% CrI, 0.71-1.03]; 95.0% probability of superiority). Unlike the IL-6 receptor antagonists, these agents are not currently standard of care for management of critical COVID-19. Although it may seem contradictory that the corticosteroid domain did not show improved mortality rates, this component of the trial was importantly halted sooner than planned due to early evidence of benefit from the RECOVERY trial,12 so it was underpowered to provide additional insight. As previously shown, therapeutic anticoagulation (in severe disease), lopinavir-ritonavir, hydroxychloroquine, and convalescent plasma had minimal benefit or even possible harm. Hydroxychloroquine treatment was associated with a concerning increase in mortality (adjusted hazard ratio, 1.51 [95% CrI, 0.98-2.29]). This is a reminder of the caution that clinicians should exercise in using unproven treatments and the importance of changing practice as evidence evolves.

Results examining the secondary outcomes of quality of life and disability are both more unexpected and more nuanced. There is further reassurance that the IL-6 receptor antagonists did not lead to worse quality of life or greater disability, and likely even improved these outcomes at 180 days. The benefits were even more certain for the antiplatelet agents, with a substantial gain of 0.08 in health-related quality of life over a baseline of 0.63 in the control group (adjusted mean difference, 0.08 [95% CrI, 0.02-0.13]). This result, combined with the 180-day mortality results also suggesting benefit, constitutes some of the most favorable evidence to date for these agents,13 especially in light of the initial trial from the REMAP-CAP group showing a 95.7% probability of futility.11

Conflicting results and a higher bleeding risk with antiplatelet therapy for COVID-19 in critical illness13 means that this new evidence is not yet enough to motivate changed practice or alter consensus guidelines. Additionally, it is important to note that quality of life and disability outcome data were missing for more than 60% of the study sample, with differences between the populations with and without missing data. Regardless, antiplatelet agents deserve further study in other trials with extended data available. Ongoing study could be particularly valuable given that one proposed explanation for long-term symptoms from COVID-19 is microvascular clotting, a plausible pathophysiologic mechanism that antiplatelet agents would target.14

One unavoidable limitation of the present study and its applicability to current practice is that COVID-19 as a disease has changed. Although infection with SARS-CoV-2 is still very much with us, preexisting population-level immunity, from vaccination, prior infection, or both, has made severe disease progressively less common.15 There is also laboratory evidence that the widely circulating Omicron variant exhibits decreased lung infectivity,16 making pneumonia—the clinical entity most commonly leading to intensive care unit admission—a less likely manifestation of disease. The evidence in this study remains valuable given that COVID-19 will continue to be a common cause of critical illness globally. However, the most effective strategy to reduce mortality and critical illness will be prevention through a global effort to expand COVID-19 vaccination.

Effects of Mindfulness Training and Exercise on Cognitive Function in Older Adults

A Randomized Clinical Trial

Key Points
Question  Does mindfulness training, exercise, or the combination of these interventions improve cognitive function in older adults with subjective cognitive concerns?

Findings  In this randomized clinical trial that included 585 participants, mindfulness training, exercise, or both did not result in significant differences in improvement in episodic memory or executive function composite scores at 6 months.

Meaning  The findings do not support the use of mindfulness training, exercise, or a combination of both for significantly improving cognitive function in older adults with subjective cognitive concerns.

Abstract
Importance  Episodic memory and executive function are essential aspects of cognitive functioning that decline with aging. This decline may be ameliorable with lifestyle interventions.

Objective  To determine whether mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR), exercise, or a combination of both improve cognitive function in older adults.

Design, Setting, and Participants  This 2 × 2 factorial randomized clinical trial was conducted at 2 US sites (Washington University in St Louis and University of California, San Diego). A total of 585 older adults (aged 65-84 y) with subjective cognitive concerns, but not dementia, were randomized (enrollment from November 19, 2015, to January 23, 2019; final follow-up on March 16, 2020).

Interventions  Participants were randomized to undergo the following interventions: MBSR with a target of 60 minutes daily of meditation (n = 150); exercise with aerobic, strength, and functional components with a target of at least 300 minutes weekly (n = 138); combined MBSR and exercise (n = 144); or a health education control group (n = 153). Interventions lasted 18 months and consisted of group-based classes and home practice.

Main Outcomes and Measures  The 2 primary outcomes were composites of episodic memory and executive function (standardized to a mean [SD] of 0 [1]; higher composite scores indicate better cognitive performance) from neuropsychological testing; the primary end point was 6 months and the secondary end point was 18 months. There were 5 reported secondary outcomes: hippocampal volume and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex thickness and surface area from structural magnetic resonance imaging and functional cognitive capacity and self-reported cognitive concerns.

Results  Among 585 randomized participants (mean age, 71.5 years; 424 [72.5%] women), 568 (97.1%) completed 6 months in the trial and 475 (81.2%) completed 18 months. At 6 months, there was no significant effect of mindfulness training or exercise on episodic memory (MBSR vs no MBSR: 0.44 vs 0.48; mean difference, –0.04 points [95% CI, –0.15 to 0.07]; P = .50; exercise vs no exercise: 0.49 vs 0.42; difference, 0.07 [95% CI, –0.04 to 0.17]; P = .23) or executive function (MBSR vs no MBSR: 0.39 vs 0.31; mean difference, 0.08 points [95% CI, –0.02 to 0.19]; P = .12; exercise vs no exercise: 0.39 vs 0.32; difference, 0.07 [95% CI, –0.03 to 0.18]; P = .17) and there were no intervention effects at the secondary end point of 18 months. There was no significant interaction between mindfulness training and exercise (P = .93 for memory and P = .29 for executive function) at 6 months. Of the 5 prespecified secondary outcomes, none showed a significant improvement with either intervention compared with those not receiving the intervention.

Conclusions and Relevance  Among older adults with subjective cognitive concerns, mindfulness training, exercise, or both did not result in significant differences in improvement in episodic memory or executive function at 6 months. The findings do not support the use of these interventions for improving cognition in older adults with subjective cognitive concerns.

Trial Registration  ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT02665481

Introduction
Most older adults experience deteriorating cognitive function. Declines in episodic memory and executive function parallel volume losses in brain structures, such as the hippocampus and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC).1,2 With the increasing age of the population, lifestyle interventions could provide a scalable means to target modifiable mechanisms of these cognitive and brain changes, thereby helping improve and maintain cognitive functioning.3

Two promising interventions are mindfulness training and exercise. Mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) is a group-based intervention based on mindfulness meditation training.4 From a mechanistic standpoint, practicing mindfulness may enhance cognitive processes such as working memory5; further, mindfulness techniques may reduce stress, thereby affecting physiological parameters such as cortisol levels and sleep.6,7 Aerobic and strength training are both theorized to be associated with cognitive function8; some studies have found exercise-related cognitive changes together with structural brain changes.9,10 Previous studies have suggested changes in insulin sensitivity, aerobic capacity, and body fat as some of the proposed mechanisms.11 MBSR and exercise could have additive benefits because their putative mechanisms may be complementary. Accordingly, a randomized clinical trial was conducted to determine whether MBSR and exercise improve cognitive function and whether the combination of MBSR and exercise has greater benefits than either intervention alone.

Methods
Study Design
The MEDEX (Mindfulness, Education, and Exercise) study was a randomized clinical trial comparing MBSR and exercise, alone or in combination, with a robust control intervention (health education) designed to control for expectancy in older adults with subjective cognitive concerns and without dementia. Outcome assessments evaluated cognitive function and brain structure over 18 months of intervention. For full details of the trial design, protocol, and statistical analysis plan, see Wetherell et al12 and Supplement 1. The study was conducted from 2015 to 2020 in St Louis, Missouri, and San Diego, California, with enrollment from November 19, 2015, through January 23, 2019, and final follow-up on March 16, 2020. Ethics approval was provided by the universities’ institutional review boards. All participants provided written informed consent. Recruitment methods included use of press (eg, television, newspapers), online sources (eg, via social media, websites), printed flyers, presentations at community outreach events, and direct mailings.

Participants
From November 2015 to January 2019, the study enrolled community-dwelling older adults. Inclusion criteria were age 65 to 84 years; self-reported age-related changes in cognitive function, defined by a positive response to questions of whether they or others had noticed trouble with their memory or concentration; and being cognitively intact, defined as scoring less than 10 on the Short Blessed Test, for which scores greater than or equal to 10 suggest impairment consistent with dementia.13 The study allowed mild cognitive impairment, and no clinical rating of dementia status was done. Exclusion criteria were neurodegenerative illness (eg, dementia, Parkinson disease, cerebrovascular disease); not sedentary (current moderate- to high-intensity exercise ≥1 h/wk or light activity ≥1 h/d; see eMethods 1 in Supplement 2 for details); current meditation practice or cognitive training; medical conditions that suggest shortened lifespan, or would prohibit safe participation, would prohibit safe participation in the interventions (eg, metastatic cancer, unstable cardiovascular disease), or would interfere with study assessments (eg, diabetes medication, systemic glucocorticoids, magnetic resonance imaging [MRI] contraindications, severe hearing/visual impairment); and nonfluent English-language speaker.

Randomization
After baseline assessment, participants were randomized to the following groups in a 1:1:1:1 ratio: MBSR alone, exercise alone, combined MBSR and exercise, and health education (control group). Using R software, the study statistician (M.D.Y.) generated the randomization sequence. The study primary investigator and coordinators were kept blinded to the randomization until the study coordinator was ready for the next group to be randomized. Participants learned their randomization assignment at the first intervention group meeting. Randomization was done in groups of approximately 15 individuals (range, 12-17) and was stratified by site.

Interventions
All interventions were conducted for 18 months, which consisted of a 6-month acute and 12-month maintenance phase.

The MBSR intervention matched the format of the consensus MBSR protocol14; after a brief introductory meeting, the intervention was conducted in 8 weekly 2.5-hour classes plus a half-day retreat. For the remainder of the 6-month acute phase and the subsequent 12 months of maintenance, MBSR classes met monthly. Content included instruction in mindfulness meditation practices and exercises to enhance mindfulness in everyday life. Participants also used A Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction Workbook.15 Participants received daily at-home assignments with a goal of 60 minutes of daily at-home meditative practice. Additional details are provided in Supplement 2.

The exercise intervention was designed to improve aerobic fitness, strength, balance, mobility, and flexibility. It consisted of facility-based, instructor-supervised 1.5-hour classes twice weekly for 6 months. Sessions included aerobic exercise, resistance training, and functional exercises. Participants were prescribed home exercise with a goal of completing at least 300 minutes per week of combined class plus home exercise. Classes continued once per week during the 12-month maintenance phase with the same exercise goal of at least 300 minutes per week. Additional details are provided in Supplement 2.

Participants in the combined MBSR and exercise intervention underwent both MBSR and exercise, with the above-listed frequency of classes and goals for each intervention.

The health education intervention was an attention placebo to control for nonspecific factors (eg, time spent in groups) and expectancy.16 It matched the MBSR intervention for group setting, class time, frequency of sessions, and attention with weekly assignments, but no goals, related to the amount of time engaged in them. It was based on the Stanford chronic disease self-management book Living a Healthy Life with Chronic Conditions,17 omitting information on mindfulness and exercise.

To monitor fidelity, both sites utilized instructors trained in the respective interventions. Instructor fidelity was maintained by regular supervision calls, measuring session time and confirming adherence to the study protocol, and, in the case of MBSR, video recording sessions with review by MBSR experts according to published fidelity criteria for mindfulness-based interventions18 (all sessions were rated as competent; Supplement 2).

To evaluate participant adherence, class attendance was monitored. Additionally, for MBSR and exercise interventions, home practice during the 6-month acute period was measured and reinforced using daily surveys sent to tablets or smartphones. During the maintenance phase, participants in the MBSR and exercise groups were asked if they had any breaks in their home practice.

Outcomes
All outcomes were measured by blinded assessors. The 2 primary outcomes were episodic memory and executive function (cognitive control) composites (standardized to a mean [SD] of 0 [1]; higher composite scores indicate better cognitive performance) at the 6-month end point. These composite scores were calculated from a neuropsychological test battery conducted at 0, 3, 6, and 18 months. The secondary end point was 18 months. These domains were selected based on previous research on the effects of mindfulness and exercise on cognitive function. Memory tests were immediate and delayed recall using a 16-item word list and 2 paragraphs developed for repeated administrations during longitudinal studies (ie, different lists and paragraphs at each time point)19 and the Picture Sequence Memory Test from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Toolbox.20 Executive function tests were the Dimensional Change Card Sort test, Flanker Inhibitory Control and Attention Test, and List Sorting Working Memory Test from NIH Toolbox and the following 3 additional computer-based tests: the Consonant-Vowel Odd-Even Switching test,21 the Sustained Attention to Response Test,22 and the Stroop Test.23 For each memory or executive function variable, a Z score was computed for each participant using the mean and SD of that variable computed on all randomized participants at baseline ([participant score − mean]/SD). Composite scores were then created by taking the mean of the Z scores of all available memory or cognitive control variables (additional details are provided in the statistical analysis plan [Supplement 1]). Composite scores, compared with individual test scores, improve both test-retest reliability and the ability to detect subtle changes in scores, as exemplified by the Preclinical Alzheimer Cognitive Composite (a clinical trial outcome that similarly combines multiple cognitive tests).24 For interpretation purposes, if the intervention was effective in improving each individual measure that comprised the composite by 1 SD, the overall composite score would improve by 1 point (compared with the control). The correlations between the baseline (month 0) and 6-month composite scores were 0.81 for the memory composite and 0.80 for the executive function composite, suggesting high reliability.

Secondary outcomes (left and right hippocampal volume and left and right DLPFC surface area and cortical thickness) consisted of high-resolution T1-weighted MRI (MP-RAGE; 1 × 1 × 1 mm; TR = 2300 ms; TI = 900 ms; TE = 2.95 ms; flip angle = 9°), which were acquired at 0, 6, and 18 months. Longitudinal FreeSurfer25 processing generated the measurements. The correlations between the baseline and 6-month MRI measures were 0.99 for hippocampal volume, 0.98 for DLPFC surface area, and 0.92 for DLPFC thickness. At the same time points, resting-state MRI data were collected; these data are presented in another report.26

Additional secondary cognitive outcomes included the Revised Observed Tasks of Daily Living27 score, a performance-based measure of functional cognitive capacity (range, 0-28; higher values indicate greater ability to complete everyday activities) and the Quality of Life in Neurological Disorders Cognitive Function28 score, a self-report measure of cognitive concerns (range, 18-90; higher values indicate better outcomes).

To assess mechanisms of exercise- and mindfulness-induced cognitive benefits, several physiological and performance measures at 0, 6, and 18 months were tested (details of measurement are provided in Supplement 2): aerobic fitness, insulin sensitivity and resistance, body fat and fat-free masses, physical performance, plasma cortisol levels, physical activity, time to fall asleep and total sleep time, mindfulness state, and upper- and lower-body strength.

Race and ethnicity were self-reported by participants based on fixed categories to understand the diversity of enrolled participants and for potential future subgroup analyses examining differences in results based on these characteristics.

Sample Size Calculation
A target sample size of 580 participants was determined based on 80% power to detect either main effects or an interaction of at least a small effect size, of 0.2 (Cohen d). The study was not designed to detect a specific minimal clinically important difference. All power analyses were conducted with G*Power, version 3.1, and assumed 15% attrition for power calculations.

Statistical Analyses
See Supplement 1 for the complete statistical analysis plan. A marginal model was fit for the repeated measures analyses. The model included the between-participant main effects of MBSR and exercise, their interaction, and the 2- and 3-way interactions between time and the between-participant effects. Time (0, 3 [cognitive measures only], 6, and 18 months) was a within-participants effect with an unspecified covariance matrix due to uneven time intervals between visits. Site, age, and sex were included as covariates in the models. Clustering by site was accounted for because site was a factor in all primary and secondary outcome models.

The primary test of effectiveness of each intervention was the change in the composite scores from baseline to 6 months in the participants randomized to undergo the intervention compared with those not receiving the intervention, as computed with the appropriate contrast (eg, MBSR vs no MBSR). The 2 × 2 factorial design was analyzed with the 2 main effects of exercise (underwent exercise intervention vs did not undergo exercise) and MBSR (underwent MBSR intervention vs did not undergo MBSR).

All randomized individuals were included in the primary analysis (Figure 1). Participants were analyzed according to their randomization group. A Bonferroni-adjusted 2-tailed significance level of .025 was used for each of the 2 primary outcomes. Effect sizes with 95% CIs for 6- and 18-month effects for all primary and secondary outcomes were computed. Because of the potential for type I error due to multiple comparisons, findings for analyses of secondary time points and secondary outcomes should be interpreted as exploratory. The mixed-model analytic approach used is robust in accounting for missing data. Participants were included in the analytic model if they had data for at least 1 time point.

Given neutral findings for the primary outcomes, the importance of post hoc analyses became clear. Subsequent per-protocol analyses were conducted, as were subgroup tests examining changes in cognitive outcomes among those who showed the most vs the least change in the physiological and performance markers described above. The 2 per-protocol groups were defined post hoc based on examination of attendance data and home practice data: participants reporting home practice of their randomized intervention (MBSR or exercise) on at least 70% of days and participants attending at least 70% of classes. Both groups also excluded individuals who participated in interventions to which they were not randomized (Supplement 2). Additionally, given that the primary outcomes showed no intervention effect, the original plan to examine MRI structural changes as part of a mediator analysis was modified: rather than examining MRI structural changes as mediators, they were analyzed as secondary outcomes. All analyses were conducted in SAS, version 9.4 (SAS Institute).

Results
Enrollment and Participant Characteristics
A total of 6104 individuals were approached by or directly contacted the study team and 734 completed baseline screening and provided written informed consent; of these individuals, 149 did not qualify or wish to participate further. Thus, 585 individuals met all study criteria and were randomized and included in the analysis. A total of 97.1% of participants completed 6-month assessments and 81.2% completed 18-month assessments (Figure 1).

The full sample had a mean (SD) age of 71.5 (4.8) years and education level of 16.2 (2.2) years and 424 (72.5%) were women, 2 (0.3%) were American Indian, 27 (4.6%) were Asian, 69 (11.8%) were Black, 477 (81.5%) were White (the remaining individuals were unknown or >1 race), and 39 (6.7%) were Hispanic/Latino. Demographic information and other baseline characteristics were well-balanced across intervention groups (Table).

Primary Outcomes
Figure 2 shows changes over 18 months in the 2 primary outcome measures: composite variables of memory and executive function. At 6 months, there were no significant differences in these measures when comparing participants with and without MBSR (memory composite score, 0.44 vs 0.48; mean difference, –0.04 points [95% CI, –0.15 to 0.07]; P = .50; executive function score, 0.39 vs 0.31; mean composite difference, 0.08 [95% CI, –0.02 to 0.19]; P = .12) and with vs without exercise (memory composite, 0.49 vs 0.42; mean difference, 0.07 points [95% CI, –0.04 to 0.17]; P = .23; executive function composite, 0.39 vs 0.32; mean difference, 0.07 points [95% CI, –0.03 to 0.18]; P = .17).

Secondary Outcomes
There were also no significant differences at 18 months (secondary end point) for the composite variables of memory (MBSR vs no MBSR: 0.61 vs 0.53; mean difference, 0.08 [95% CI, –0.04 to 0.19]; P = .18; exercise vs no exercise: 0.55 vs 0.59; mean difference, –0.04 [95% CI, –0.15 to 0.07]; P = .47) and executive function (MBSR vs no MBSR: 0.27 vs 0.31; mean difference, –0.04 [95% CI, –0.15 to 0.07]; P = .44; exercise vs no exercise: 0.28 vs 0.29; mean difference, –0.01 [95% CI, –0.12 to 0.11]; P = .93)

Secondary outcomes included structural MRI measures (Figure 3) and additional cognitive outcomes (Supplement 2). At 6 months, there were no significant intervention effects on hippocampal volume (MBSR vs no MBSR: difference, –3.46 mm3 [95% CI, –14.27 to 7.34]; P = .53; exercise vs no exercise: difference, 3.04 mm3 [95% CI, –7.76 to 13.85]; P = .58), DLPFC surface area (MBSR vs no MBSR: difference, 22.71 mm2 [95% CI, –22.95 to 68.36]; P = .33; exercise vs no exercise: difference, –17.18 mm2 [95% CI, –62.83 to 28.48]; P = .46), or cortical thickness (MBSR vs no MBSR: difference, –0.01 mm [95% CI, –0.02 to 0.01]; P = .37; exercise vs no exercise: difference, 0.01 mm [95% CI, 0.00-0.02]; P = .21). At the secondary time point of 18 months, there was also no significant intervention effects on DLPFC surface area (MBSR vs no MBSR: difference, 25.35 mm2 [95% CI, –23.18 to 73.88]; P = .31; exercise vs no exercise: difference, 21.11 mm2 [95% CI, –27.41 to 69.64]; P = .39) or cortical thickness (MBSR vs no MBSR: difference = –0.01 mm, [95% CI, –0.02 to 0.00], P = .10; exercise vs no exercise: difference, –0.01 mm [95% CI, –0.02 to 0.00]; P = .09). One exception was that hippocampal volume showed a significantly greater reduction over 18 months with MBSR compared with no MBSR (difference, –20.16 mm3 [95% CI, –33.88 to –6.44]; P = .004), contrary to the hypothesized direction of change; however, there was no significant intervention effect with exercise compared with no exercise (difference, –6.26 mm3 [95% CI, –19.98 to 7.46]; P = .37). There was also a main effect of time for hippocampal volume (P < .001) and DLPFC cortical thickness (P < .001) (but not DLPFC surface area [P = .68]), which declined in all groups over 18 months. There were no significant intervention effects on the secondary cognitive outcomes (Observed Tasks of Daily Living or Neurological Disorders Cognitive Function score; eFigure 2 in Supplement 2).

Tests of Combination MBSR and Exercise and Intervention Interactions
Interactions between the 2 factors in the 2 × 2 design (MBSR vs no MBSR and exercise vs no exercise) were tested. Because none of the interaction test results were significant at 6 months (memory composite, P = .93; executive function composite, P = .29; hippocampal volume, P = .76; DLPFC surface area, P = .19; and DLPFC cortical thickness, P = .52), the primary analyses described above were conducted by pooling the factorial groups. eTable 1 in Supplement 2 presents a 4-group analysis (MBSR alone, exercise alone, combined MBSR and exercise, and health education), along with full data on the 3-way interactions tested for the primary outcomes and secondary MRI outcomes. This comparison shows that combined MBSR and exercise showed no significant improvement compared with MBSR alone, exercise alone, or health education (eFigure 1 in Supplement 2).

Adherence to the Interventions and Per-Protocol Analysis
Participants had a median (IQR) attendance of 90% (80.0%-100.0%) at MBSR classes and 83.3% (71.7%-91.7%) at exercise classes in the first 6 months. eFigure 3 in Supplement 2 shows adherence to the interventions based on home practice and class attendance. eTable 2 in Supplement 2 compares intervention effects in the entire sample and the per-protocol subgroups; results are unchanged for all primary and secondary outcomes.

Post Hoc Analysis of Subgroups That Showed Putatively Beneficial Effects of Interventions

eTable 3 in Supplement 2 shows the effects of the interventions on multiple performance and physiological measures. Physical performance, aerobic fitness, and strength increased and sleep quality significantly improved (sleep latency was reduced and total sleep time was increased) with exercise (eTable 3A in Supplement 2). No variables were influenced by MBSR, including self-reported mindfulness (eTable 3B in Supplement 2).

Subgroups of participants who had the most change (top tertile) vs those who had the least change (bottom tertile) in these performance and physiological variables were then evaluated in terms of changes in their cognitive performance. eTable 4 in Supplement 2 quantifies these tertiles and eFigure 4 in Supplement 2 compares their episodic memory and executive function changes over 18 months. As shown in eFigure 4 in Supplement 2, there were, at most marginal, and, in the majority of cases, no differences in subgroups, which suggests limited to no evidence that MBSR or exercise differentially affected cognitive performance of participants in the top vs bottom tertiles; therefore, no inferential statistics were calculated.

Discussion
In this multicenter trial involving older adults with subjective cognitive concerns, mindfulness training, exercise, or both did not result in significant differences in improvement in episodic memory or executive function composite scores at 6 months. In secondary analyses, there were no significant improvements due to the interventions at 18 months in secondary outcomes, including structural brain measures of hippocampus and DLPFC. The findings do not support the hypothesis that these interventions improve cognitive performance in older adults.

These null findings differ from positive findings in some randomized clinical trials of exercise29 and epidemiological data that have suggested that exercise was associated with improved cognitive and brain health in older adults,30 as well as a smaller body of literature supporting the beneficial role of mindfulness.31 There are several potential causes for these null findings. First, all groups showed increases in cognitive performance over time, so it could be posited that all interventions (including health education) benefited participants equally and these increases reflect those benefits, and thus the study failed due to lack of a proper negative control. Arguing against this idea is that the health education intervention was designed for this study so that it would not specifically target cognition (eg, it did not include a mindfulness or exercise regimen). Further, if cognitive performance increases represented true benefits, one would expect to see a reflection of those benefits in brain structures (ie, increase or attenuated decrease in the size of hippocampus and DLPFC, structures involved in episodic memory, and executive function), yet both structures showed longitudinal declines with all conditions, consistent with age-related atrophy not attenuated by the interventions. In addition, the combination of MBSR and exercise showed no greater change than each intervention alone. Thus, the increases in cognitive performance likely reflect expectancy or practice effects from repeated exposure to the assessments.

Another potential cause of the null findings was failure in target engagement (ie, failure in having the desired effect from the interventions), which could result from poor participant adherence, low intervention fidelity by instructors, low intensity of interventions, or low reliability of outcome measures. However, none of these problems were apparent: participants demonstrated high adherence and retention in the study, instructors were trained and supervised for fidelity, the intensity of interventions was similar to that in prior trials, and outcome reliability was good. Furthermore, per-protocol analyses of participants that were more highly adherent to the interventions showed no significant differences from the overall sample. In the exercise intervention, physiological and performance changes suggest participants benefited from exercise. Thus, the findings are similar to the Lifestyle Interventions and Independence for Elders Study, which showed a beneficial effect of 24 months of exercise on disability prevention, but not cognitive performance.32 In contrast, MBSR was not associated with significant change in any physiological or performance measure, which raises the question of whether the implementation of MBSR was sufficient; however, given adequate instructor fidelity, participant class attendance, and home practice, the lack of a measurable effect of mindfulness training may reflect a lack of clearly-measurable targets in mindfulness-based intervention.

Another possibility accounting for lack of detectable effect of interventions is that participants were generally healthy and potentially insufficiently sedentary at baseline, thereby limiting potential for benefiting from lifestyle interventions. To test this, subgroup analyses of those who showed the greatest changes in physiological or performance variables posited to underlie cognitive health (eg, improved insulin sensitivity) were conducted. These analyses found that, even when the interventions produced beneficial changes in these putative mechanisms, they still did not lead to significant cognitive benefits. Thus, the health of the participants does not appear to explain the null results. As a whole, these results suggest that the underlying hypothesis is unsupported.

Limitations
This study has several limitations. First, the participants were largely White and the majority were college-educated; this limited diversity reduces generalizability of findings. Second, the study focused on structural characteristics of hippocampus and DLPFC as proxy measures of the brain’s health; other regions or assessment techniques might be more sensitive to intervention effects.33 Third, the study tested interventions over 18 months; a longer period of intervention may be needed to show beneficial effects. Fourth, the study focused on healthy older adults who were objectively cognitive intact; some studies have found beneficial effects of exercise on cognitive function in more physically or cognitively ill and frail older adults,34 as well as benefits of MBSR in older adults with depression and anxiety.7 Fifth, individuals with subjective cognitive concerns are a heterogeneous group that could include those with incipient dementia as well as individuals experiencing the influence of medications, medical conditions, or nutrition status. These and other potentially remediable mechanisms beyond cortisol, insulin sensitivity, and aerobic fitness were not examined in this study and should be considered in future research.

Conclusions
Among older adults with subjective cognitive concerns, mindfulness training, exercise, or both did not result in significant differences in improvement in episodic memory or executive function composite scores at 6 months. The findings do not support the use of these interventions for improving cognition in older adults with subjective cognitive concerns.

Ending the HIV Epidemic
We Have the Tools, Do We Have the Will?

This World AIDS Day feels different. Due to remarkable strides during the last 4 decades, the medical community now has the tools to end the HIV epidemic. Yet barriers persist, such as stigma, discrimination, and racial injustice, which have fueled the HIV epidemic from the outset and continue to stoke an ever-growing hostility aimed at vulnerable, at-risk populations.

To achieve the US Department of Health and Human Services initiative Ending the HIV Epidemic with the 2030 goal of decreasing new HIV infections by 90%, major gaps in the HIV response must be closed. Success depends on reaching the 13% of 1.2 million people with HIV who are unaware of their status, helping the 1 in 3 people with HIV who are not receiving treatment or who are not virally suppressed engage in medical care, and scaling up treatment for the large proportion of the more than 1 million people who could benefit from but are not taking HIV preexposure prophylaxis (PrEP).1 Furthermore, the US must expand syringe services programs; provide treatment for mental health and substance use disorders rooted in harm-reduction principles; create safe, respectful environments for the lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) community; and build trust with racial and ethnic minoritized populations. If these gaps are not addressed, individuals disproportionately affected by HIV will not be reached, including men who have sex with men (MSM) and transgender women, especially those of Black and Hispanic race and ethnicity, along with Black women, people in the South, and rural communities.

The 71% of new HIV infections in the US are among MSM, followed by Black cisgender women.1 HIV prevalence among transgender women is estimated at 42%, driven by high rates among Black and Hispanic transgender women.2 Black and Hispanic people disproportionately account for 42% and 27% of new HIV diagnoses yet are only 9% and 16% of PrEP users, respectively.1 People living in the South account for more than half of new infections and yet have disproportionately low rates of PrEP use. Many rural communities are decimated by substance use disorder, limited access to treatment, and resultant HIV outbreaks secondary to injection drug use.

Key principles critical to expanding and improving health care services to reach the aforementioned at-risk communities have been outlined3 and include ensuring access to affordable and comprehensive health care for all and funding innovative care models, particularly delivering health care “where people are.” In addition, policies that address social determinants of health associated with structural racism and that fight stigma and discrimination should be adopted, along with repealing and reforming laws and policies that criminalize people with HIV, interfere with patients’ rights to receive medical care, and violate the sanctity of the patient-clinician relationship.

The HIV workforce requires thoughtful consideration. There is a shortage of HIV clinicians, especially in the South, where a staggering 81% of counties have no HIV-experienced clinicians, with rural counties faring the worst.4 The HIV workforce is also stretched to its limits responding to the COVID-19 pandemic and the monkeypox outbreak. If the HIV epidemic is to end, the medical community must foster a robust, culturally competent, and diverse HIV workforce capable of responding to HIV as part of a synergistic epidemic that includes interactions between biological, behavioral, and social factors. Ignoring sexually transmitted infections, drug injection and the opioid crisis, viral hepatitis, COVID-19, and monkeypox will only lead to inadequate responses and persistent disparities. As an example, 38% of all individuals with monkeypox infections in the US are also people with HIV,5 with higher rates among Black and Hispanic populations.

Yet even an adequate HIV workforce will not succeed in implementing novel programs and interventions (eg, long-acting injectable medication for HIV treatment and prevention and monkeypox vaccinations) without engaging the affected communities in every aspect of decision-making. This lesson was again seen during the response to the monkeypox outbreak. The LGBT community changed sexual behaviors and advocated strongly for vaccination, likely contributing to the decline in cases, a salient reminder that the voices of those affected must always be heard.

The crises of drug injection and overdose must also be addressed. Outbreaks of HIV secondary to drug injection will continue unmitigated if access to syringe services programs, mental health services, and substance use disorder treatment including medication for opioid use disorder is not increased. Drug injection also increases the risk of other infectious diseases, such as viral hepatitis and endocarditis. Innovative approaches will be required to implement and scale these services, especially in rural areas. A diverse coalition of clinicians (eg, primary care physicians, infectious disease specialists, pharmacists) who are working collaboratively in a harm-reduction model is essential. The 2014-2015 HIV and hepatitis C outbreak in Scott County, Indiana,6 should have been an example for other communities to increase access to syringe services programs, substance use disorder treatment, and HIV screening, PrEP, and treatment. Despite the warnings, additional outbreaks were subsequently identified in Massachusetts, Washington, Kentucky, Ohio, and West Virginia—where evidence-based, lifesaving syringe services programs were shuttered in 2018. At present, drug injection is the predominant mode of HIV transmission in West Virginia.7

Finally, the medical community must stand up against the culture wars that are harming patients and clinicians alike. The medical community must not be silent while anti-LGBT laws, regulations, and policies are passed that interfere with medical decisions between patients, families, and their medical team. Those who will be most harmed by this interference are the individuals and communities already experiencing health disparities.

Many southern states have both high HIV incidence and the fewest LGBT protections. There are restrictions on LGBT-inclusive sexual education and discussion in schools and antitransgender policies and regulations against participation in sports. Alabama, Arkansas, Arizona, and Florida have enacted laws or policies that would ban or restrict care for transgender individuals, further stigmatizing and impeding one of the communities at the highest risk of HIV infection from engaging in comprehensive primary and LGBT care including HIV prevention services, with many other states inspired to incipient action. In Alabama, the state ban would make gender-affirming care for transgender youth a felony. In Texas, Oklahoma, and Tennessee, even in the absence of legislation, officials have been successful in restricting access to care for transgender youth.8 Many colleagues across the US are receiving threats simply because they provide gender-affirming care. These laws or proposed laws go against national and international medical associations’ recommendations for care of transgender individuals (which facilitates PrEP and HIV treatment), inhibit scientific research, and directly exacerbate the HIV epidemic by adding stigma, isolation, discrimination, and fear to those seeking gender-affirming care, and those providing that care.

Furthermore, in September of this year, a Texas judge ruled that an employer can refuse coverage for PrEP, one of the major cornerstones of the bipartisan Ending the HIV Epidemic, based on religious freedom.9 Such a ruling opens the door to potential denial of care and coverage for PrEP and other treatments.

In 2022, the evidence-based tools and interventions that can end the HIV epidemic are available, but success is incumbent on navigating an environment that has become increasingly hostile and politicized. This World AIDS Day, what we need to do is clear. We must cultivate a diverse clinical workforce. We must include affected communities at the table. We must advocate for policies to ensure that medicine can be practiced without interference. We must confront stigma and discrimination and focus on health equity at every turn. If we do this, indeed the HIV epidemic could be ended.

The Children’s Health Insurance Program at 25
The Road Ahead

On August 5, 1997, the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 was signed into law. Despite the bill’s significant spending cuts, the omnibus legislation included a number of provisions that boosted federal investment in the social safety net, one of which amended the Social Security Act of 1935 to create and fund the State Children’s Health Insurance Program (SCHIP). Renamed the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) in 2007, the program, originally championed by senators Edward M. Kennedy (D, Massachusetts) and Orrin G. Hatch (R, Utah), constituted, at the time, the largest federal expansion of health insurance coverage since the institution of Medicaid in 1965. Launched with a 10-year, $39.65 billion budget, CHIP has since been reauthorized several times. Funding is presently ensured through fiscal year 2027, with a fiscal year 2022 budget of $25.9 billion. Although policy changes enacted during the COVID-19 pandemic have ensured the health insurance coverage of millions of US children, the approaching end of the public health emergency will soon put those gains at risk. This Viewpoint examines the growth and benefits of CHIP over its first 25 years, details some of its future challenges, and offers recommendations to maximize health insurance coverage for US children in the future.

CHIP was created in the wake of the 1994 collapse of the Health Security Act (HSA), the far-reaching attempt of the Clinton administration to achieve universal health care coverage. The collapse of the HSA incentivized political leaders to push for a less comprehensive but bipartisan expansion of coverage. Prior to the passage of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997, an estimated 10 million US children lacked health insurance.1 Complicating matters was the reality of significant congressional opposition to any new federal entitlements.

The compromise program to emerge, CHIP, offered states the opportunity to expand health insurance coverage to low-income children by expanding Medicaid or by creating new state programs that met benefit and cost-sharing standards less generous than Medicaid. States could also combine aspects of both approaches. States that chose to expand their Medicaid programs were subject to extant Medicaid eligibility rules, whereas states that created new separate CHIP programs had more flexibility in their design. Several elements were included in CHIP’s design to increase its acceptability to some states, which would largely be responsible for its implementation. The program was not funded as a new entitlement, but rather through block grants to limit costs. To incentivize states to expand coverage to children, the federal government covered a larger share of CHIP’s costs than those of Medicaid. Additionally, in an attempt to avoid crowding out private insurance, eligibility was restricted to children without other potential forms of coverage.2

The establishment of CHIP sparked renewed efforts at the state and federal levels to reduce the number of uninsured children. Working together, Medicaid and CHIP have profoundly benefited low-income children in the US. The number of uninsured children in the US declined by nearly two-thirds between 1997 and 2016 to an estimated 3.6 million before increasing to 4.4 million in 2019.3 Children enrolled in Medicaid and CHIP are more likely to have seen a physician, have had a well-child visit, and have undergone dental and eye examinations compared with children without health insurance.1 Although it is challenging to disentangle the contributions of CHIP from those of Medicaid expansions, studies have suggested that CHIP and Medicaid improved health care access, reduced unmet care needs among children from ethnic and racial minority groups and with chronic health conditions, and boosted insurance rates and rates of physician visits among children aged 13 though 18 years. Moreover, Medicaid coverage in early life has been linked to a decreased incidence of chronic conditions, fewer emergency department visits, and a reduction in hospitalizations among younger adults.4-7

A key inflection point lies ahead for many children and their families. The Families First Coronavirus Response Act, passed in early 2020, increased the share of Medicaid and CHIP spending covered by the federal government by 6.20% and 4.34%, respectively, for all states and territories through the end of the COVID-19 public health emergency. The law also barred states from removing individuals from Medicaid for the duration of the public health emergency, thus ensuring that children and adults had “continuous coverage.” As a result, child (and adult) enrollment in Medicaid has increased considerably during the pandemic. As of November 2021, an estimated 40 million children were covered through Medicaid and CHIP.8 However, when the public health emergency ends, the enhanced federal matching rate will lapse and the eligibility of individuals enrolled in Medicaid (and CHIP-funded Medicaid expansions) will need to be reassessed or “redetermined.”

This unprecedented undertaking will occur at a time when states are understaffed and in some cases under acute pressure from state legislatures to reduce Medicaid enrollment. One projection suggests this action could put the health insurance coverage of an estimated 6.7 million US children at risk.3 Many parents are unlikely to know that their child has been disenrolled until they seek care, thereby ensuring that clinicians, pharmacists, other health professionals, and health care organizations and entities will be the first line of contact for children who have lost their coverage through this process. Federal and state policy makers, health care centers, managed care plans, and community-based outreach groups must work together to ensure that children are not disenrolled from these programs en masse. Additionally, Congress should consider mandating 12 months of continuous eligibility for children in Medicaid or CHIP. In the absence of federal action, states that have not already done so can adopt this option for children in both Medicaid and CHIP to reduce the risk that children lose their health insurance in the redetermination process.

In the longer term, Medicaid and CHIP should be expanded to reach more US children. The landscape for children’s coverage has significantly changed since CHIP was created, most notably with the 2010 passage of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, which affirmed the fundamental role of Medicaid and CHIP in providing coverage for low- and moderate-income children. However, an estimated 4.3 million US children still lacked health insurance coverage in 2020, and the number of uninsured children in the US increased for the first time from 2016 to 2019.3,9 It is likely that the institution of the Medicaid continuous coverage provision stabilized or even reduced the number of uninsured children during the pandemic because the majority of uninsured children prior to the pandemic were eligible, but not enrolled, in Medicaid or CHIP.

Once the public health emergency ends, however, a bold vision will be needed to move toward universal health insurance coverage for US children. Full consideration, for example, should be given to raising the mandatory minimum eligibility threshold for Medicaid and CHIP to 300%, or perhaps 400%, of the federal poverty level nationally with the assistance of federal funding and eliminating the federal legal status standard for the enrollment of immigrant children in Medicaid and CHIP. Together, these changes could broaden the reach of Medicaid and CHIP to nearly all uninsured US children.10

Additionally, the funding of CHIP, unlike Medicaid, must be renewed periodically by Congress. Although CHIP has historically enjoyed bipartisan support, it has not been completely insulated from partisan politics. In 2007, for example, President George W. Bush twice vetoed bipartisan bills that would have expanded eligibility and extended funding for CHIP. Ten years later, amid congressional differences, CHIP funding lapsed for 114 days. With polarization now a hallmark of US politics, the future of CHIP is hardly ensured. Its funding should thus be rendered permanent.

Over the past 25 years, CHIP and Medicaid have together sharply reduced the rate of uninsured children in the US. As the COVID-19 public health emergency begins to resolve, the federal government, states, and their partners, including health care centers, managed care plans, and community-based outreach groups, must work together to ensure that millions of US children do not lose their health insurance coverage. Additionally, full consideration should be given to expanding Medicaid or CHIP’s eligibility criteria, establishing permanent funding for CHIP and requiring 12 months of continuous coverage for children in both Medicaid and CHIP. Of note, the latter 2 of the aforementioned provisions were included in the Build Back Better Act, which passed the House of Representatives in November 2021. While the bill has stalled in the Senate, negotiations on crafting a replacement are ongoing. As CHIP enters its 26th year, the stakes for US children could not be higher.

Association of Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation With New Mental Health Diagnoses in Adult Survivors of Critical Illness

Key Points
Question  Is the use of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) associated with postdischarge psychiatric morbidity among adult survivors of critical illness?

Findings  In this population-based retrospective cohort study of 4462 participants, exposure to ECMO, compared with intensive care unit hospitalization without ECMO, was significantly associated with a modestly increased risk of new mental health diagnoses or social problems after discharge (hazard ratio, 1.24).

Meaning  Among adult survivors of critical illness, receipt of ECMO was significantly associated with a modestly increased risk of new mental health diagnoses or social problems, but further research on the mechanisms underlying this relationship is needed.

Abstract
Importance  Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) is used as temporary cardiorespiratory support in critically ill patients, but little is known regarding long-term psychiatric sequelae among survivors after ECMO.

Objective  To investigate the association between ECMO survivorship and postdischarge mental health diagnoses among adult survivors of critical illness.

Design, Setting, and Participants  Population-based retrospective cohort study in Ontario, Canada, from April 1, 2010, through March 31, 2020. Adult patients (N=4462; age ≥18 years) admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU), and surviving to hospital discharge were included.

Exposures  Receipt of ECMO.

Main Outcomes and Measures  The primary outcome was a new mental health diagnosis (a composite of mood disorders, anxiety disorders, posttraumatic stress disorder; schizophrenia, other psychotic disorders; other mental health disorders; and social problems) following discharge. There were 8 secondary outcomes including incidence of substance misuse, deliberate self-harm, death by suicide, and individual components of the composite primary outcome. Patients were compared with ICU survivors not receiving ECMO using overlap propensity score–weighted cause-specific proportional hazard models.

Results  Among 642 survivors who received ECMO (mean age, 50.7 years; 40.7% female), median length of follow-up was 730 days; among 3820 matched ICU survivors who did not receive ECMO (mean age, 51.0 years; 40.0% female), median length of follow-up was 1390 days. Incidence of new mental health conditions among survivors who received ECMO was 22.1 per 100-person years (95% confidence interval [CI] 19.5-25.1), and 14.5 per 100-person years (95% CI, 13.8-15.2) among non-ECMO ICU survivors (absolute rate difference of 7.6 per 100-person years [95% CI, 4.7-10.5]). Following propensity weighting, ECMO survivorship was significantly associated with an increased risk of new mental health diagnosis (hazard ratio [HR] 1.24 [95% CI, 1.01-1.52]). There were no significant differences between survivors who received ECMO vs ICU survivors who did not receive ECMO in substance misuse (1.6 [95% CI, 1.1 to 2.4] per 100 person-years vs 1.4 [95% CI, 1.2 to 1.6] per 100 person-years; absolute rate difference, 0.2 per 100 person-years [95% CI, −0.4 to 0.8]; HR, 0.86 [95% CI, 0.48 to 1.53]) or deliberate self-harm (0.4 [95% CI, 0.2 to 0.9] per 100 person-years vs 0.3 [95% CI, 0.2 to 0.3] per 100 person-years; absolute rate difference, 0.1 per 100 person-years [95% CI, −0.2 to 0.4]; HR, 0.68 [95% CI, 0.21 to 2.23]). There were fewer than 5 total cases of death by suicide in the entire cohort.

Conclusions and Relevance  Among adult survivors of critical illness, receipt of ECMO, compared with ICU hospitalization without ECMO, was significantly associated with a modestly increased risk of new mental health diagnosis or social problem diagnosis after discharge. Further research is necessary to elucidate the potential mechanisms underlying this relationship.

Introduction
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) provides temporary respiratory and/or cardiac support to critically ill patients and is often considered when initial conventional treatment has failed.1-3 Existing observational and randomized evidence have supported the use of ECMO in reducing short-term mortality in refractory respiratory failure, cardiogenic shock, and cardiac arrest.4-7 Furthermore, while ECMO is associated with substantial inpatient resources and costs, a significant number of survivors after ECMO are alive up to 5 years postdischarge, with relatively minimal resource utilization.8 The use of ECMO has grown worldwide, particularly in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, where ECMO has been used for refractory respiratory failure in cases of severe COVID-19.9

Despite collective public optimism surrounding the use of ECMO in refractory cases of critical illness,10 much less is understood about the long-term morbidity associated with this therapy, particularly as it pertains to mental health outcomes. Survivors of critical illness are known to have substantial physical morbidity,11 and existing data demonstrate that these patients are at risk of downstream psychiatric morbidity,12 including higher incidence of mental health diagnoses, psychoactive medication use, substance misuse, self-harm, and suicide.13-15 Given the severity of illness found among patients receiving ECMO, its invasive nature, as well as the prolonged duration of therapy and recovery that is often required among those who survive, it was hypothesized that survivors after ECMO may be at even greater risk of downstream mental health morbidity than other survivors of critical illness. This study investigated the incidence of long-term mental health morbidity associated with ECMO survivorship, using population-based data from Ontario, Canada, and compared this with non-ECMO ICU survivorship.

Methods
Data Sources and Setting
We conducted a population-level cohort study using health administrative databases from Ontario, Canada (population 14.6 million). Within Ontario’s single-payer health care system, all publicly funded health care services, and physician, hospital, and demographic information for residents are recorded in administrative databases (ICES). Studies conducted at ICES using administrative data fall under section 45 of the Personal Health Information Protection Act of Ontario and do not require research ethics board approval. Data are collected without a requirement for individual patient consent. We linked 10 databases at ICES (eTable 1 in the Supplement) at the individual patient level, from April 1, 2010, through March 31, 2020 (inclusive). Patients are linked across provincial databases using their Ontario Health Insurance Plan (OHIP) number, which is unique to each citizen in Ontario. Data contained in ICES are full and complete, with the exception of emigration from Ontario, which represents approximately 0.5% of patients per year.

We registered our protocol with the Center for Open Science (https://osf.io/vn5bg).

Patients
We included consecutive adult patients (≥18 years of age), with an index intensive care unit (ICU) discharge in Ontario from April 1, 2010, through March 31, 2020 (inclusive), who received ECMO and who survived to hospital discharge. We identified ECMO use by the presence of an inpatient ECMO intervention code in the Discharge Abstract Database and a billing code for ECMO in the OHIP Claims Database, as performed previously (eTable 2 in the Supplement).8,16 We matched these patients with those admitted to an ICU setting during the study period but who never received ECMO and survived to hospital discharge. For control participants with multiple ICU admissions, we randomly selected one for inclusion as the index admission. We excluded patients admitted to the ICU due to deliberate self-harm, as these patients are at high risk for future self-harm and suicide.15 We captured history of preexisting mental health diagnoses in the 5 years prior to the index admission through the use of International Statistical Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision (ICD-10) codes and any outpatient mental health visits with a primary care physician or psychiatrist in the previous year.

Outcomes
The primary outcome was incidence of any new mental health diagnosis postdischarge, occurring prior to the end of the study period, the patient’s death, or emigration from Ontario. New mental health diagnoses were determined using the ICES Mental Health and Addictions Scorecard17 (eTable 2 in the Supplement), as used previously,15 and include any of the following: mood or anxiety disorders (eg, depression, anxiety, posttraumatic stress disorder [PTSD]), schizophrenia or psychotic disorders, other mental health diagnoses (including adjustment reaction, reactive depression, anxiety neurosis, hysteria, neurasthenia, obsessive-compulsive neurosis, personality disorders, sexual deviations, and psychosomatic illness), or social problems (including economic problems, marital difficulties, family disruption or divorce, parent-child problems, problems with aged parents, educational problems, social maladjustment, occupational problems, and legal problems). Diagnoses could be noted from either inpatient hospital admissions or outpatient encounters (including primary care or emergency department visits).

Secondary outcomes included substance misuse (secondary to alcohol or drug dependence), the composite of any new mental health diagnosis or substance misuse, death by suicide, and hospital visit for deliberate self-harm.15 We also separately evaluated each of the 4 components of the primary outcome (mood disorder/anxiety disorder/PTSD; schizophrenia/psychotic disorder; other mental health diagnoses; and social problems) as secondary outcomes. As per ICES regulations, cell sizes with 5 patients or less were suppressed to protect patient confidentiality.

Statistical Analyses
We present data as mean (SD) or median (IQR) values. Since ECMO is used only in select institutions in Ontario, and there are relatively stringent selection criteria for receiving ECMO, we created an initial matched cohort of 6 non-ECMO ICU controls for every single ECMO case. We performed greedy matching using the index admission institution, age (5-year groups), and the Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI).18 To compare crude mental health outcome rates, we reported the incidence proportion and rate per 100 person-years with accompanying 95% CIs.

To estimate the association between ECMO survivorship and postdischarge mental health diagnoses, suicide, and self-harm, we followed existing recommendations for causal inference in critical care19,20 and analyzed ECMO survivorship and non-ECMO ICU survivorship using overlap propensity-score weighting.15 The overlap weights technique was used to assign less weight to those with outlier propensity scores and more weight to those with propensity scores close to 0.5. This technique improves covariate balance and overlap of probabilities in creating propensity scores, as compared with other approaches.21 Overlap weighting does not exclude any potential study participants and is not affected by extreme outliers overdominating the analyses, which can occur with traditional propensity-score matching or inverse probability-treatment weighting.

As recommended, we identified covariates a priori, based on 2 factors: (1) existing literature and hypotheses about potential for confounding; and (2) their ability to influence the provision or timing of ECMO (as determined in existing randomized trials).4,7 We included the following preadmission confounders: age, sex, number of encounters (hospital admissions, outpatient psychiatry visits, outpatient physician visits) in the past year, previous outpatient mental health or substance misuse visits to primary care clinicians, income quintile, rural residency, CCI score, specific comorbidities that might influence ECMO candidacy (ie, malignancy, chronic kidney disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, preexisting mental health disorders, and previous history of self-harm). We also included confounders arising during admission: year of admission, institution, severity of illness (assessed using the Multiple Organ Dysfunction Score [MODS]) at the time of ICU admission, use of invasive mechanical ventilation, kidney replacement therapy, tracheostomy, ICU length of stay, hospital length of stay, and discharge disposition. Based on previous work, we anticipated less than 1% of neighborhood income quintile and rurality, and less than 3% of MODS and ICU length of stay to be missing at random. For the former, we imputed the mode, and for the latter, we imputed the age and index ECMO status group mean.

We compared cohorts before and after overlap weights for balance by using weighted standardized differences. We fit an overlap-weighted cause-specific Cox proportional hazards model with robust standard errors to examine ECMO survivorship vs non-ECMO ICU survivorship with the study outcomes, while accounting for mortality as a competing risk. We tested the proportionality assumption by including a statistical interaction between ECMO survivorship status and follow-up time as a linear term. The Wald χ2 tests yielded a P value of greater than 0.1. We interpreted this as evidence of minimal violation of the proportionality assumption and did not carry forward the statistical interaction and compute time-dependent hazard ratios (HRs). Patients were censored from the analysis at the first instance of any of the following: death, loss of Ontario health insurance status, or the end of the study period (March 31, 2020). We used overlap-weighted cumulative incidence function (CIF) curves to plot the weighted CIF of new mental health diagnoses in the follow-up, and used the CIF equality test to see if the curves were statistically different. To estimate potential bias related to unmeasured confounders, we computed an E value.22

To identify prognostic factors associated with new postcritical illness mental health outcomes, we generated separate cause-specific Cox proportional hazards regression models using the ECMO survivor cohort. We followed the PROGRESS guidelines23,24 and recommendations for development of prognostic models in critical care.25 These guidelines recommend a clinically hypothesis-driven approach for a priori selection of all model variables, as opposed to bivariable association testing methods.

Sensitivity Analyses
We preplanned sensitivity analyses to further evaluate potential confounding of our causal inference analyses by specific variables.

First, we hypothesized that access to in-person clinical visits with physicians (including primary care physicians and psychiatrists) would be strongly affected by restrictions instituted during the COVID-19 pandemic, and this had the potential to influence our primary outcome (new mental health diagnosis). As such, we conducted a sensitivity analysis excluding survivors after ECMO from our cohort who were discharged from hospital on January 1, 2020, or later, and we terminated the follow-up window on December 31, 2019. Second, while the ICES databases have strong validity in identifying new mental health diagnoses, they may not as easily identify worsening or decompensated mental illness among patients with preexisting mental health diagnoses. Further, patients with preexisting mental health follow-up may be more likely to be diagnosed with new mental illness after ICU admission, and this could represent a source of bias. Therefore, we conducted a sensitivity analysis following exclusion of patients with any mental health diagnoses in the previous 5 years. In addition, despite the use of overlap weights, we thought that the non-ECMO ICU cohort might include those with lower severity of illness, and so we performed a post hoc sensitivity analysis excluding control patients who did not receive invasive mechanical ventilation. We conducted all statistical analyses using SAS Enterprise Guide 7.1 (SAS Institute Inc). A P value of less than .05 (2-sided) was deemed to be statistically significant. Because of the potential for type I error due to multiple comparisons, findings for analyses of secondary end points should be interpreted as exploratory.

Results
Cohort Construction and Categorization
A total of 1054 adult patients received ECMO in Ontario during the study period. Of these, 412 were excluded (406 [38.5%] died prior to hospital discharge, and 6 of those who survived [0.6%] received ECMO due to deliberate self-harm), and 642 patients were included in the analyses. These patients were initially matched 1:6 to 3830 non-ECMO ICU survivors on the basis of institution, age, and CCI score. Median duration of follow-up was 730 days (IQR, 289-1437) among survivors after ECMO, and 1390 days (IQR, 572-2408) among non-ECMO ICU survivors.

Baseline Characteristics and ICU Interventions
Baseline characteristics of survivors after ECMO, along with matched controls (prior and after overlap weight application) are shown in Table 1. Among ECMO patients, the mean (SD) age was 50.7 (14.8) years, 40.7% were women, and 467 (72.7%) had a CCI of 2 or less. Among non-ECMO ICU survivors, the mean age was 51.0 (15.0) years, 39.9% were women, and 2798 (73.1%) had a CCI of 2 or less. In terms of preexisting psychiatric history, 300 (46.7%) survivors after ECMO, and 1850 (48.3%) of non-ECMO ICU survivors had at least 1 primary care or psychiatry visit for mental health in the preceding 5 years.

Index admission characteristics of survivors after ECMO, along with matched controls (prior and after overlap weight application) are depicted in Table 2. The primary indication for ECMO was respiratory failure, occurring in 400 patients (62.3%). The mean MODS was 5.6 (SD, 3.3), with 152 patients (23.7%) receiving kidney replacement therapy, and 221 (34.4%) receiving tracheostomy. Median hospital length of stay was 41 days (IQR, 23-70), and 210 patients (32.7%) were discharged to a long-term care facility after their acute care hospitalization. Categorization by year of admission is shown in eTable 3 in the Supplement.

Association of ECMO With Mental Health Outcomes
Balance after overlap weighting between ICU survivors who were and were not exposed to ECMO are shown in Table 1, Table 2, and eFigure in the Supplement. Weighted standard difference across all covariables was 0.00. Incidence rates and adjusted HRs showing the association between ECMO survivorship and the outcomes of interest (using non-ECMO ICU survivors as the reference) and accounting for competing risk of death are shown in Table 3, with weighted CIF curves displayed in the Figure. Raw counts of the outcomes prior to overlap weights are shown in eTable 4 in the Supplement.

Primary Outcome
With regard to the primary outcome, 236 (36.8%) survivors after ECMO, and 1565 (40.9%) of non-ECMO ICU survivors were diagnosed with a new mental health condition following discharge. The incidence rate was 22.1 per 100 person-years (95% CI, 19.5-25.1) among survivors after ECMO, compared with 14.5 per 100 person-years (95% CI, 13.8 to 15.2) among non-ECMO ICU survivors (absolute rate difference, 7.6 per 100 person-years [95% CI, 4.7 to 10.5]). Following propensity score weighting, survivors after ECMO had significantly higher associated risk of new mental health diagnoses (HR, 1.24 [95% CI, 1.01 to 1.52]; E value, 1.59). This same relationship was seen in our sensitivity analyses excluding patients discharged on or after January 1, 2020, (n = 4324; HR, 1.27 [95% CI, 1.03 to 1.57]; E value, 1.64), excluding patients with a previous history of mental health diagnoses (n = 2412; HR, 1.43 [95% CI, 1.02 to 2.00]; E value, 1.87), and our post hoc analysis excluding patients who did not receive mechanical ventilation (n = 2140; HR, 1.28 [95% CI, 1.04 to 1.57]; E value, 1.66).

Secondary Outcomes
Findings for individual components of the primary composite outcome are presented in Table 3. Additionally, ECMO survivorship was not significantly associated with postdischarge substance misuse (HR, 0.86 [95% CI, 0.48 to 1.53]; absolute rate difference, 0.2 per 100-person years [95% CI, −0.4 to 0.8]) or deliberate self-harm (HR, 0.68 [95% CI, 0.21 to 2.23]; absolute rate difference of 0.1 per 100-person years [95% CI, −0.2 to 0.4]). There were less than 5 cases of suicide total across the entire cohort.

Factors Associated With New Mental Health Diagnoses Among Survivors After ECMO
Among the 642 ECMO patients who survived to discharge, prognostic factors associated with incidence of new mental health diagnoses are presented in Table 4. The only 2 prognostic factors found to be significantly associated with new mental health diagnoses were preexisting mental health diagnosis (HR, 2.39 [95% CI, 1.78 to 3.20]) and having had an outpatient psychiatry visit in the year prior to the index admission (1.82 [95% CI, 1.25 to 2.65]).

Discussion
Among adult survivors of critical illness, receipt of ECMO, compared with ICU hospitalization without ECMO, was significantly associated with a modestly increased risk of new mental health diagnosis or social problem diagnosis after discharge. However, the mechanisms underlying this relationship are unclear.

Key stakeholders in ECMO research have identified long-term sequelae associated with ECMO survivorship to be a priority, but to date, little evidence exists.26 To that end, the results of this current study show that diagnoses of new mental health conditions were common among survivors after ECMO. The most frequent diagnoses were related to depression, anxiety, and traumatic disorders, which was unsurprising given the invasive nature of critical care. Such diagnoses are the most common among all adult survivors of critical illness.27,28 In addition, this work found that ECMO survivorship was significantly associated with an increased risk of postdischarge mental health diagnoses. This relationship appears to be potentially greater than what is seen among non-ECMO ICU survivors, a population that has been quite vulnerable to psychiatric morbidity.12,29 Particularly in the context of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and an associated increase in the use of ECMO worldwide, this work provides important information for clinicians with regard to psychological supports for survivors following discharge. That said, while there was an association between ECMO survivorship and downstream psychiatric morbidity, the results suggest that the associated increased risk was likely modest. It was also found that there was no association with substance misuse or deliberate self-harm, and suicide was rare. These relatively small absolute differences must be considered in the context of randomized evidence suggesting improved survival among patients receiving ECMO for refractory respiratory and cardiac failure.4,5,7 As such, while the findings of this current study should not preclude selection of patients for receipt of ECMO, they serve to identify a potential group of vulnerable patients that may more commonly experience psychiatric morbidity, and thus require additional downstream support.

While the present study draws attention to a potential relationship, further research is needed to provide insights into the mechanisms that may potentially link ECMO survivorship with psychiatric morbidity. In the prognostic model, the only 2 factors that were found to be associated with future mental health diagnoses were preexisting mental health diagnoses and previous outpatient psychiatric visits. However, the prognostic association of these factors may be related to confounding, as such patients are more likely to have existing contact with a mental health clinician and thus receive a mental health diagnosis. There are a number of theoretical associations between ECMO survivorship and downstream mental health morbidity. Although data are limited, existing work on functional capacity and health-related quality of life among survivors after ECMO shows that these patients experience substantial physical limitations following discharge, similar to studies of non-ECMO adult survivors of critical illness.30 Furthermore, existing data have linked severity and course of ICU admission with mental health morbidity.15,27,28 This relationship is the most likely explanation for the study findings. ECMO patients represent a unique and extreme subset of patients who experience prolonged and intense courses of critical illness, and this may predispose these patients to mental health morbidity. While no statistically significant differences in individual psychiatric diagnoses were seen between survivors after ECMO and non-ECMO ICU survivors, the primary composite appeared to be driven by “other mental health” diagnoses (eg, adjustment reaction, reactive depression), which may be expected since such diagnoses are typically deemed secondary to an acute stressor or event. Whether ECMO itself causes psychiatric morbidity is controversial, and little mechanistic evidence exists. Patients receiving ECMO may be particularly prone to hypoxemia or shock, and reduced oxygen delivery (potentially through microcirculatory disturbances) can predispose neurons to apoptosis and death.31 Similar theories have been suggested as explanations for neurocognitive and psychiatric sequelae seen in adult survivors of critical illness, particularly those with severe hypoxemic respiratory failure.32-34 ECMO patients are at higher risk of particular neurological complications than non-ECMO ICU patients, such as ischemic stroke or prolonged delirium,35 and this may manifest in downstream psychiatric morbidity. As such, future research is needed in order to identify potential mechanistic links, as these links may serve as targets for future interventions.

Limitations
This study has several limitations. First, this work is observational, and thus cannot confirm a causal relationship between ECMO provision and downstream mental health morbidity. Despite statistical adjustment, the possibility of residual confounding remains. Second, while many covariates were measured, the granularity of the available data was limited (eg, ECMO indications and configurations), suggesting the possible influence of unmeasured confounding. There was also imprecision in the findings. To that end, multiple sensitivity analyses were performed, and an E value was calculated to provide insights into the reliability of our findings. Third, the outcomes were limited only to mental health diagnoses identified in visits with clinicians remunerated through the provincial health care system. Services privately paid for by patients would not have been captured. Similarly, the outcome of self-harm was only limited to events that would have required hospital attention. Fourth, while the included patients came from multiple centers, they exist within the same province and health care system, and thus these findings may not be generalizable to all populations.

Conclusions
Among adult survivors of critical illness, receipt of ECMO, compared with ICU hospitalization without ECMO, was significantly associated with a modestly increased risk of new mental health diagnosis or social problem diagnosis after discharge. Further research is necessary to elucidate the potential mechanisms underlying this relationship.

Hospital Rankings and Health Equity

For more than 30 years, rankings published by US News & World Report and other organizations have measured various facets of hospital performance. Of the 6 domains of quality identified in the landmark 2001 report Crossing the Quality Chasm,1 5 domains—safety, efficacy, efficiency, timeliness, and patient-centeredness—have been addressed to varying degrees in hospital rankings. Major rankings, however, largely have not examined the sixth crucial domain of quality: equity.

This must now change. Recent developments support an emerging consensus. Health care experts have issued calls for hospital rankings that use measures of health equity, and approaches have been demonstrated by organizations including the Lown Institute and IBM Watson. Correcting inequities that plague the US health care system will require purposeful measurement.

On July 26, 2022, US News & World Report published new and updated health equity measures for hospitals featured on the publication’s website.2 This Viewpoint summarizes why and how US News & World Report has approached evaluating and publicly reporting hospital performance in various aspects of health equity and describes several novel equity measures published under the aegis of its “Best Hospitals” rankings program.

Development of Health Equity Measures

Each equity measure was developed under a framework comprising 3 domains: access, outcomes, and social determinants of health. Analogous to the domains of the Donabedian model of quality, these represent areas in which hospitals have opportunities to promote equitable health. Measures in the access domain evaluate the extent to which vulnerable patient populations residing in the hospital’s community are able to make use of various health care services. The outcomes domain refers to whether the results of care differ between certain groups of patients. The social determinants of health domain examines ways in which hospitals address social conditions that create and exacerbate health inequities.

Measures in each domain have been published on US News & World Report’s online profiles of eligible hospitals; in the future, potentially as early as 2023, a composite index will combine these into a summary score. Once completed, the composite index may serve as a standalone ranking or may be incorporated into existing US News & World Report rankings.

Access

Studies have highlighted substantial differences in patient demographic characteristics among hospitals located in the same community. For example, Black patients disproportionately receive care in hospitals with lower volume, lower quality, and fewer advanced treatments available.3 Similarly, patients with lower income or Medicaid insurance coverage may have difficulty accessing care due to barriers such as transportation or fewer clinicians accepting Medicaid,4 among others. While some observers may be tempted to attribute this pattern of segregation to patient choice or external factors alone, the extent to which hospitals’ policies and practices may cause or perpetuate them warrants further investigation.

To investigate racial and ethnic disparities in access, a team of US News & World Report analysts evaluated how closely each hospital’s population of patients with Medicare undergoing typically elective procedures reflect the demographics of Medicare beneficiaries residing in the surrounding community. Measures examined the representation of Asian American and Pacific Islander, Black, Hispanic, Native American, and all non-White patients. Separately, to investigate access to inpatient care for patients with Medicaid insurance regardless of race or ethnicity, Medicare cost reports data were used to compare, for each hospital, the proportion of inpatients insured by Medicaid vs the proportion of community residents insured by Medicaid. The analysis controlled for certain hospital and community factors.

Outcomes

Previous studies that investigated outcome disparities found that Black patients were more likely to experience higher readmission rates compared with White patients after undergoing certain procedures, such as coronary artery bypass graft surgery or lumbar spinal fusion surgery.5,6 The factors driving these disparities are believed to vary widely. For instance, a study of women who underwent hysterectomy found that Black women were more likely to be treated by surgeons who performed low volumes of these procedures.7 This same study found that patients operated on by surgeons with low procedure volume were at an increased risk of mortality and complications. Another study found that insurance coverage differences accounted for about half of the observed disparity in survival rates between Black and White patients with colorectal cancer.8

To investigate outcome disparities, hospital-level differences in the risk of 30-day unplanned readmission between visits for Black patients and White patients following coronary artery bypass graft surgery, knee replacement procedures, and spinal fusion surgery were examined for hospitals that treated at least 12 patients of each race within the study period. The model specification was consistent with modeling performed in the Best Hospitals analyses, included covariates such as age and comorbidities, and adjusted for certain social, economic, and environmental factors that could potentially confound the relationship between race and readmission. These included a proxy for the social vulnerability of the patient, determined by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s county-level Social Vulnerability Index data, and the percentage of the hospital’s patient population that was represented by Black patients.

Social Determinants of Health

For uninsured individuals, the inability to pay for health care often manifests as delayed care focused on emergency department services, overall significantly lower utilization than insured individuals, and higher resulting morbidity and mortality. Even though hospital charity care can significantly alleviate individuals’ inability to pay, financial assistance policies and amounts distributed can vary widely even between hospitals in the same community.9 Additionally, nonprofit hospitals are obligated by law to devote a portion of expenditures toward Community Benefit activities, which include charity care, to meet the requirements of their tax-exempt status. Prior research has noted that hospital choices in the construction of their financial assistance policies can have a large influence on the amount of financial assistance, including charity care received by patients.10

To investigate differences among hospitals’ contributions toward charity care for uninsured individuals, Medicare cost reports data were used to examine the relative alignment of a hospital’s proportion of costs spent on uninsured charity care to its community’s proportion of uninsured individuals. This measure examines whether a hospital’s uninsured charity care costs are significantly above or below what would be expected after controlling for hospital and community factors.

Limitations and Future Directions

The current analysis examining hospital rankings for equity has several limitations. First, Hospital Service Areas (HSAs) were used to define hospital communities; however, in some instances, the HSA might not most accurately represent the population that a hospital serves. The HSA was selected as the geographic unit because of its widespread use in health services research, its feasibility to be merged with the available data, and its applicability nationwide. Second, the observational data used in this analysis may have included unmeasured confounding factors that limit the ability to derive causal inferences for any disparities that may be observed. Third, due to the complex and multifactorial nature of health disparities in the US, there may be important aspects of health equity in which disparities exist but are not addressed by the current methodology and measure portfolio. Fourth, the focus on Medicare fee-for-service beneficiaries in some measures may obscure disparities in the type of or lack of insurance coverage.

Conclusions

Limitations notwithstanding, public reporting of these measures may bring awareness and resources to areas where improvements can be made to achieve health equity. Like other elements of US News & World Report’s public reporting program, the health equity measure portfolio could be expected to expand and evolve. Input from subject matter experts including, but not limited to, researchers, clinicians, community representatives, and health care leaders will be key to help improve communication of findings to the public, implement strategies to refine the methodology, and identify new data sources to measure additional components of equity relevant to hospitals. Future measures may further expand on existing measure constructs or may explore other facets of health inequities not yet addressed. As the measure portfolio continues to develop, it may be considered for inclusion in the methodology behind future Best Hospitals rankings.

Noninvasive Neuromodulation May Help Improve Function in Cerebral Palsy

An investigational external neuromodulation device combined with activity-based neurorehabilitation therapy improved gross motor function—including the ability to take independent steps—among children with cerebral palsy in a pilot study reported in Nature Communications. Although the improvements were both clinically and statistically significant, outcomes with neurorehabilitation therapy alone need further assessing, according to the authors.

The spinal neuromodulation device, called SCiP by manufacturer SpineX Inc, attaches to the neck, mid-back, and hips, where it modulates transcutaneous electrical spinal cord signals to the spinal cord and other nerve centers. The authors hypothesize that this enhances neural communication in both directions, increasing neuroplasticity and enabling sensorimotor learning. Such neuromodulation has been shown to aid breathing and functional recovery of the upper and lower extremities, trunk, bladder, and bowel after spinal cord injuries, they wrote.

The study involved 16 children aged 2 years to 16 years with cerebral palsy, 9 of whom were nonambulatory with Gross Motor Function Classification Scale level IV-V and 7 of whom were able to take some steps with level I-II. After 8 weeks of twice-weekly combined treatment, all the children showed sensorimotor functional gains. Only 4 children were nonambulatory, 3 were capable of stepping with minimal assistance, and 10 were able to step independently with no external assistance. These improvements corresponded with a 15-point increase on the Gross Motor Function Classification Scale for patients with level I-II and an 11-point increase for patients with level IV-V.

The results suggest that a combined neuromodulation and neurorehabilitation approach may improve self-initiated sensorimotor functions in people with cerebral palsy, the authors concluded.

Aspirin Use to Prevent Cardiovascular Disease
US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement

Abstract
Importance  Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the leading cause of mortality in the US, accounting for more than 1 in 4 deaths. Each year, an estimated 605 000 people in the US have a first myocardial infarction and an estimated 610 000 experience a first stroke.

Objective  To update its 2016 recommendation, the US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) commissioned a systematic review on the effectiveness of aspirin to reduce the risk of CVD events (myocardial infarction and stroke), cardiovascular mortality, and all-cause mortality in persons without a history of CVD. The systematic review also investigated the effect of aspirin use on colorectal cancer (CRC) incidence and mortality in primary CVD prevention populations, as well as the harms (particularly bleeding) associated with aspirin use. The USPSTF also commissioned a microsimulation modeling study to assess the net balance of benefits and harms from aspirin use for primary prevention of CVD and CRC, stratified by age, sex, and CVD risk level.

Population  Adults 40 years or older without signs or symptoms of CVD or known CVD (including history of myocardial infarction or stroke) who are not at increased risk for bleeding (eg, no history of gastrointestinal ulcers, recent bleeding, other medical conditions, or use of medications that increase bleeding risk).

Evidence Assessment  The USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that aspirin use for the primary prevention of CVD events in adults aged 40 to 59 years who have a 10% or greater 10-year CVD risk has a small net benefit. The USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that initiating aspirin use for the primary prevention of CVD events in adults 60 years or older has no net benefit.

Recommendation  The decision to initiate low-dose aspirin use for the primary prevention of CVD in adults aged 40 to 59 years who have a 10% or greater 10-year CVD risk should be an individual one. Evidence indicates that the net benefit of aspirin use in this group is small. Persons who are not at increased risk for bleeding and are willing to take low-dose aspirin daily are more likely to benefit. (C recommendation) The USPSTF recommends against initiating low-dose aspirin use for the primary prevention of CVD in adults 60 years or older. (D recommendation)

Summary of Recommendations
See the Summary of Recommendations figure.

Importance
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the leading cause of mortality in the US, accounting for more than 1 in 4 deaths.1 Each year, an estimated 605 000 people in the US have a first myocardial infarction and an estimated 610 000 experience a first stroke.2

USPSTF Assessment of Magnitude of Net Benefit
The US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) concludes with moderate certainty that aspirin use for the primary prevention of CVD events in adults aged 40 to 59 years who have a 10% or greater 10-year CVD risk has a small net benefit.

The USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that initiating aspirin use for the primary prevention of CVD events in adults 60 years or older has no net benefit.

See the Table for more information on the USPSTF recommendation rationale and assessment and the eFigure in the Supplement for information on the recommendation grade. See Figure 1 for a summary of the recommendation for clinicians. For more details on the methods the USPSTF uses to determine the net benefit, see the USPSTF Procedure Manual.3

Practice Considerations
Patient Population Under Consideration
This recommendation applies to adults 40 years or older without signs or symptoms of CVD or known CVD (including history of myocardial infarction or stroke) who are not at increased risk for bleeding (eg, no history of gastrointestinal ulcers, recent bleeding, other medical conditions, or use of medications that increase bleeding risk). In this recommendation statement, CVD risk and the net benefits of aspirin use are discussed using the terms “men” and “women,” although it is likely that CVD risk and net benefit estimates are driven by sex (ie, male/female) rather than gender identity.

Assessment of Risk
CVD Risk
Older age is one of the strongest risk factors for CVD. Men have a higher overall CVD disease burden, although women experience higher mortality from certain cardiovascular events, such as stroke. Men tend to experience CVD events earlier in life compared with women. The burden of CVD also differs by race and ethnicity. Among both sexes, Black persons have the highest prevalence of CVD.2

The American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) Pooled Cohort Equations may be used to estimate 10-year risk of CVD. The ACC/AHA risk estimator is, to date, the only US-based CVD risk prediction tool that has published external validation studies in other US-based populations.4 The estimator has separate equations based on sex and for Black persons and non-Black persons, which include the risk factors of age, cholesterol levels, systolic blood pressure level, antihypertension treatment, presence of diabetes, and smoking status, and focuses on hard clinical outcomes (myocardial infarction and death from coronary heart disease; ischemic stroke and stroke-related death) as the outcomes of interest. It is important to note that increasing age heavily influences the ACC/AHA estimated 10-year CVD event risk. The risk prediction equations generally show higher risk for Black persons than White persons.4 The USPSTF recognizes that race is a social construct and an imperfect proxy for social determinants of health and the effects of structural racism. Concerns about calibration exist, with many external validation studies showing overprediction in broad populations (men and women across racial and ethnic groups).5-7 Limited evidence also suggests underprediction in disadvantaged communities8,9 that could lead to underutilization of preventive therapies. Clinicians should recognize that predictions of 10-year CVD events using the Pooled Cohort Equations are estimates.

Bleeding Risk
The risk for gastrointestinal bleeding, intracranial hemorrhage, and hemorrhagic stroke, with or without aspirin use, increases with older age. Other risk factors include male sex, diabetes, history of gastrointestinal issues (such as peptic ulcer disease), liver disease, smoking, and elevated blood pressure. Certain medications, including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, steroids, and anticoagulants, increase the risk of bleeding.10-13 These risk factors should be considered in the overall decision about whether to start or continue aspirin therapy.

Treatment or Intervention
The benefits of aspirin for CVD prevention appear similar for a low dose (≤100 mg/d) and for all doses that have been studied in CVD prevention trials (50 to 500 mg/d).14 A pragmatic approach would be to use 81 mg/d, which is the most commonly prescribed dose in the US.

Implementation
Because CVD risk estimation is imprecise and imperfect at the individual level, the USPSTF suggests using these risk estimates as a starting point to discuss with appropriate candidates their desire for daily aspirin use. The benefits of initiating aspirin use are greater for individuals at higher risk for CVD events (eg, those with >15% or >20% 10-year CVD risk).

In addition to age and estimated level of CVD risk, decisions about initiating aspirin use should be based on shared decision-making between clinicians and patients about the potential benefits and harms. Persons who place a higher value on the potential benefits (decreasing an individual’s risk of a myocardial infarction or stroke) than the potential harms (the risk of gastrointestinal or intracranial bleeding) may choose to initiate low-dose aspirin use. Persons who place a higher value on the potential harms or the burden of taking a daily preventive medication than on the potential benefits may choose not to initiate low-dose aspirin use.

Stopping Age
Annual bleeding events in individuals without risk factors for increased bleeding (eg, history of gastrointestinal bleeding risk, history of peptic ulcer disease, or use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or corticosteroids) are rare, but risk for bleeding increases modestly with advancing age.12 For persons who have initiated aspirin use, the net benefits continue to accrue over time in the absence of a bleeding event. The net benefits, however, generally become progressively smaller with advancing age because of an increased risk for bleeding, and modeling data suggest that it may be reasonable to consider stopping aspirin use around age 75 years.

Additional Tools and Resources
Million Hearts 2022 is a national initiative to prevent 1 million myocardial infarctions and strokes within 5 years. It focuses on implementing a small set of evidence-based priorities and targets that can improve cardiovascular health for all (https://millionhearts.hhs.gov/).

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has resources related to risk of heart disease and the prevention of heart disease for patients and health professionals (https://www.cdc.gov/heartdisease/index.htm).

The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute has patient resources related to coronary heart disease (https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-topics/coronary-heart-disease).

Other Related USPSTF Recommendations
The USPSTF has made several other recommendations on CVD prevention, including statin use to prevent CVD,15 smoking cessation,16 counseling to promote a healthful diet and physical activity in persons with and without cardiovascular risk factors,17,18 and interventions to prevent obesity-related morbidity and mortality,19 as well as screening for high blood pressure20 and diabetes.21 The USPSTF has also made a recommendation on screening for colorectal cancer (CRC).22

Update of Previous USPSTF Recommendation
This recommendation replaces the 2016 USPSTF recommendation on aspirin use to prevent CVD and CRC.23 In 2016, the USPSTF recommended initiating low-dose aspirin use for the primary prevention of CVD and CRC in adults aged 50 to 59 years who have a 10% or greater 10-year CVD risk, are not at increased risk for bleeding, have a life expectancy of at least 10 years, and are willing to take low-dose aspirin daily for at least 10 years, and that the decision to initiate low-dose aspirin use in adults aged 60 to 69 years who have a 10% or greater 10-year CVD risk should be an individual one. The USPSTF previously found that the evidence was insufficient to assess the balance of benefits and harms of initiating aspirin use for the primary prevention of CVD and CRC in adults younger than 50 years or adults 70 years or older.

For the current recommendation, the USPSTF has changed the age ranges and grades of its recommendation on aspirin use. The USPSTF recommends that the decision to initiate low-dose aspirin use for the primary prevention of CVD in adults aged 40 to 59 years who have a 10% or greater 10-year CVD risk should be an individual one and recommends against initiating low-dose aspirin use for the primary prevention of CVD in adults 60 years or older. Based on new trial evidence,24 updated analyses of the evidence from primary CVD prevention populations,14 and longer-term follow-up data from the Women’s Health Study (WHS) (I.-M. Lee, ScD, Harvard Medical School, written communication, November 23, 2020), the USPSTF concluded that the evidence is inadequate that low-dose aspirin use reduces CRC incidence or mortality.

Supporting Evidence
Scope of Review
To update its 2016 recommendation, the USPSTF commissioned a systematic review on the effectiveness of aspirin to reduce the risk of CVD events (myocardial infarction and stroke), cardiovascular mortality, and all-cause mortality in persons without a history of CVD. The systematic review also investigated the effect of aspirin use on CRC incidence and mortality in primary CVD prevention populations, as well as the harms, particularly bleeding harms, associated with aspirin use.14,25

In addition to the systematic evidence review, the USPSTF commissioned a microsimulation modeling study to assess the net balance of benefits and harms from aspirin use for primary prevention of CVD and CRC, stratified by age, sex, and CVD risk level. Modeling study parameter inputs were informed by the results of the systematic review, and the primary outcomes were net benefits expressed as quality-adjusted life-years and life-years.26,27

Benefits of Preventive Medication
The USPSTF considered 13 randomized clinical trials (RCTs) involving 161 680 participants that reported on the benefits of aspirin use for the primary prevention of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality.14,25 Most trials used low-dose aspirin of 100 mg/d or less or aspirin every other day and included a balanced number of male and female participants and a broad distribution of ages, with mean age ranging from 53 years in the Physicians' Health Study28 to 74 years in the Aspirin in Reducing Events in the Elderly (ASPREE) trial.24

The evidence showed that aspirin use for primary prevention of CVD was associated with a decreased risk of myocardial infarction and stroke but not cardiovascular mortality or all-cause mortality. Results were similar when including studies using all doses of aspirin compared with studies using low-dose aspirin.14 Since low-dose aspirin is most relevant to current practice, the analyses below report outcomes pooling studies of low-dose aspirin use. Pooled effect estimates of studies using low-dose aspirin were also used to inform the parameters and assumptions of the microsimulation modeling study.26,27

A pooled analysis of 11 trials (n = 134 470) showed that low-dose aspirin use was associated with a statistically significant decreased risk of nonfatal myocardial infarction (Peto odds ratio [OR], 0.88 [95% CI, 0.80-0.96]). Similarly, a pooled analysis of 5 trials (n = 54 947) demonstrated that low-dose aspirin use was associated with a statistically significant decreased risk of nonfatal ischemic stroke (Peto OR, 0.88 [95% CI, 0.78-1.00]; P = .046). Fatal cardiovascular events were less common, so pooled analyses showed that low-dose aspirin use was not associated with a statistically significant effect on fatal myocardial infarction, fatal stroke, cardiovascular mortality, or all-cause mortality (at 3.6 to 10.1 years of follow-up).14,25 Although evidence does not suggest that the relative effect of aspirin on CVD outcomes is modified by baseline CVD risk, the absolute magnitude of the benefit is greater in persons at higher CVD risk.

New RCT data, as well as newly available information on the age distribution of participants in the WHS, show that almost 22 000 participants younger than 50 years and more than 37 000 participants 70 years or older were included in the CVD prevention trials. Most trials with age subanalyses did not find a statistically significant difference in the relative effect of aspirin on CVD outcomes by age.14,25 The USPSTF thus concluded that evidence on the benefits of aspirin on CVD outcomes was adequate for all groups, including adults aged 40 to 49 years and adults 70 years or older.

The evidence review found fewer studies reporting on the effects of aspirin use on CRC incidence or mortality. Four studies conducted in primary CVD prevention populations found no association between aspirin use and CRC incidence at up to approximately 10 years of follow-up.14,25 Only 1 trial, the WHS (n = 39 876), reported on the effect of low-dose aspirin use on CRC incidence beyond 10 years by including posttrial observational follow-up. Although the WHS reported a lower incidence of CRC at 17.5 years of follow-up (Peto OR, 0.82 [95% CI, 0.69-0.98]),29 recent data showed that this effect did not persist from 17.5 to 26 years of follow-up (I.-M. Lee, ScD, Harvard Medical School, written communication, November 23, 2020). Two RCTs, ASPREE24 and WHS (I.-M. Lee, ScD, Harvard Medical School, written communication, November 23, 2020), reported CRC mortality during the trial phase. ASPREE reported that aspirin use was associated with statistically significantly higher CRC mortality at 4.7 years of follow-up (Peto OR, 1.74 [95% CI, 1.02-2.95]), while the WHS did not find a statistically significant increase in CRC mortality at 10 years. When including observational follow-up beyond the trial phase, 2 trials of low-dose aspirin use reported reductions in CRC mortality. In the Thrombosis Prevention Trial30,31 (n = 5085), low-dose aspirin use was associated with a statistically significant lower risk of CRC mortality at 18.3 years of follow-up (Peto OR, 0.62 [95% CI, 0.41-0.94]), and the WHS reported lower CRC mortality at 17.5 years of follow-up that was not statistically significant (Peto OR, 0.86 [95% CI, 0.64-1.16]) and was attenuated from 17.5 to 26 years of follow-up (I.-M. Lee, ScD, Harvard Medical School, written communication, November 23, 2020).

The body of evidence on the effects of aspirin use on CRC incidence and mortality is limited by several factors. Overall, only a small number of trials reported on CRC outcomes. The ASPREE trial in older adults found aspirin use to be associated with an increased risk of CRC mortality.24 Although this finding does not constitute firm evidence that aspirin use is associated with increased risk of CRC mortality, it is one factor that calls into question whether aspirin use has a beneficial effect on CRC outcomes. Longer-term follow-up data suggesting that aspirin use is associated with lower CRC risk is heavily weighted by 1 trial conducted in women only, and the evidence on CRC mortality is limited by few CRC deaths. Additionally, posttrial follow-up data may be subject to biases, and in some cases, CRC outcomes data were collected by outside investigators.14,25

Harms of Preventive Medication
The USPSTF reviewed 14 RCTs in CVD primary prevention populations that reported on the bleeding harms of aspirin. Studies reported a variety of outcomes, including total major bleeds (defined as a composite of intracranial hemorrhage, major gastrointestinal bleeding, or major bleeding from other sites), major gastrointestinal bleeds (defined as a gastrointestinal bleed that required a transfusion, hospital admission, or resulted in death), extracranial bleeds (defined as major bleeding that was not intracranial), hemorrhagic stroke, and intracranial bleeds (defined as hemorrhagic stroke, subarachnoid hemorrhage, and subdural hemorrhage).14,25

When looking at studies reporting on the harms of low-dose aspirin use (≤100 mg/d), which is most relevant to current practice, a pooled analysis of 10 trials (n = 119 130) showed that aspirin use was associated with a 58% increase in major gastrointestinal bleeding (Peto OR, 1.58 [95% CI, 1.38-1.80]). A pooled analysis of 11 trials (n = 134 470) showed an increase in intracranial bleeds in the aspirin group compared with the control group (Peto OR, 1.31 [95% CI, 1.11-1.54]). Low-dose aspirin use was not associated with a statistically significant increase in risk of fatal hemorrhagic stroke.14,25

Data suggest that the increased incidence of bleeding associated with aspirin use occurs relatively quickly after initiating aspirin, and data do not suggest that aspirin has a differential relative bleeding risk based on age, sex, presence of diabetes, level of CVD risk, or race or ethnicity.14,25 Although the increase in relative risk does not appear to differ based on age, the absolute incidence of bleeding, and thus the magnitude of bleeding harm, increases with age, and more so in adults 60 years or older. Because of the very small number of fatal gastrointestinal bleeding events in trials and inconsistent reporting, it is uncertain whether aspirin use increases fatal gastrointestinal bleeding.14,25

Estimate of Magnitude of Net Benefit
The USPSTF commissioned a microsimulation model to estimate the magnitude of net benefit of low-dose aspirin use.26,27 The model incorporated findings from the systematic review to inform its parameters and assumptions, including that daily low-dose (≤100 mg/d) aspirin use reduces the risk of nonfatal myocardial infarction and nonfatal stroke, increases the risk of major gastrointestinal bleeding and intracranial hemorrhage, and has no effect on the risk of CVD mortality. As there was insufficient evidence that aspirin use reduces CRC incidence, the modeling study base case assumed no effect of aspirin on CRC incidence.

Modeling outcomes were stratified by age, decade of aspirin initiation (40-49 years, 50-59 years, 60-69 years, and 70-79 years), sex, and baseline 10-year CVD risk level (5% to 20%). When combined with primary trial data and pooled analyses from the systematic evidence review, the model provided additional information to assess the balance of benefits and harms of aspirin use. The primary model outcomes were net quality-adjusted life-years and life-years gained or lost over a lifetime as a result of aspirin use. Also considered was the effect of stopping aspirin that had been initiated for primary prevention over 5-year age intervals from ages 65 to 85 years.26,27

Modeling data estimated that aspirin use in both men and women aged 40 to 59 years with 10% or greater 10-year CVD risk generally provides a modest net benefit in both quality-adjusted life-years and life-years gained. Initiation of aspirin use in persons aged 60 to 69 years results in quality-adjusted life-years gained that range from slightly negative to slightly positive depending on CVD risk level, and life-years gained are generally negative. In persons aged 70 to 79 years, initiation of aspirin use results in a loss of both quality-adjusted life-years and life-years at essentially all CVD risk levels modeled (ie, up to 20% 10-year CVD risk) (Figure 2).26,27 The USPSTF thus determined that aspirin use has a small net benefit in persons aged 40 to 59 years with 10% or greater 10-year CVD risk and that initiation of aspirin use has no net benefit in persons 60 years or older.

When looking at net lifetime benefit of continuous aspirin use until stopping at age 65, 70, 75, 80, or 85 years, modeling data suggested that there is generally little incremental lifetime net benefit in continuing aspirin use beyond the age of 75 to 80 years.26,27 It is important to note that the net benefit of continuing aspirin use by persons in their 60s or 70s is not the same as the net benefit of initiating aspirin use by persons in their 60s or 70s. This is because, in part, CVD risk is heavily influenced by age. Persons who meet the eligibility criteria for aspirin use at a younger age (ie, ≥10% 10-year CVD risk in their 40s or 50s) typically would have even higher CVD risk by their 60s or 70s compared with persons who first reach a 10% or greater 10-year CVD risk in their 60s or 70s and may gain more benefit by continuing aspirin use than persons at lower risk might gain by initiating aspirin use.

How Does Evidence Fit With Biological Understanding?
Aspirin’s mechanism of action to promote CVD prevention is well known. At lower doses, aspirin is an irreversible cyclooxygenase 1 (COX-1) enzyme inhibitor. At higher doses, aspirin also inhibits COX-2. Aspirin reduces the risk for atherothrombosis through the inhibition of platelet function (through COX-1 inhibition) and has been used widely for the prevention of CVD events, particularly for secondary prevention.32 The COX-1 enzyme is also responsible for producing a variety of prostaglandins that protect the gastrointestinal mucosa.33 By inhibiting this enzyme, aspirin use can promote gastrointestinal bleeding.34 The mechanism for the possible antineoplastic effects of aspirin is not as well understood.14

Response to Public Comment
A draft version of this recommendation statement was posted for public comment on the USPSTF website from October 12 to November 8, 2021. In response to public comment, the USPSTF wants to restate that the focus of this recommendation is the use of aspirin for the primary prevention of CVD and not for other indications. This recommendation only applies to persons who do not have a history of CVD, signs or symptoms of CVD, or other conditions for which aspirin may be indicated. Persons who are currently taking aspirin and have questions about why they are taking it, or whether they should continue or discontinue aspirin use, should discuss these questions with their clinician. Persons who are taking aspirin should not discontinue using it without consulting their clinician. For persons who are deciding with their clinician whether to continue or discontinue taking aspirin for primary prevention, clinicians may want to consider that person’s age, level of CVD risk and bleeding risk, preferences, and reasons for taking aspirin.

In response to public comment, the USPSTF clarified language about its assessment of the precision of CVD risk assessment and added information on factors that can be considered by clinicians and patients as they engage in shared decision-making about the initiation of aspirin use. Information on the evidence the USPSTF reviewed on the effect of aspirin on CRC incidence and mortality and how it considered the findings from the ASPREE trial can also be found in the Supporting Evidence section of this recommendation. Also, in response to public comment, the USPSTF wants to note that it did not review the emerging evidence on the effect of aspirin on COVID-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2.

Research Needs and Gaps
More research is needed to evaluate the following.

Improving the accuracy of CVD risk prediction in all racial and ethnic and socioeconomic groups.

The gastrointestinal bleeding risk associated with aspirin use in populations representative of the US primary CVD prevention population.

Characterizing the distribution of patient preferences across the spectrum of cardiovascular risk after patients are informed about the benefits and harms of aspirin.

The effects of low-dose aspirin use on CRC incidence and mortality over the long term (10 to 20 years and longer) in primary prevention populations and in the context of current CRC screening practices.

Recommendations of Others
The ACC/AHA recommends that low-dose aspirin use (75 to 100 mg/d) might be considered for the primary prevention of atherosclerotic CVD among select adults aged 40 to 70 years at higher CVD risk but not at increased risk of bleeding. Low-dose aspirin use is not recommended on a routine basis for primary prevention of CVD in adults older than 70 years or among adults of any age who are at increased risk of bleeding.35 The American Academy of Family Physicians supports the 2016 USPSTF recommendation on aspirin use.36

