On Snake Island, the rocky Black Sea outcrop that became a Ukraine war legend

Snake Island, Ukraine
CNN
 — 
Snake Island has a special place in Ukraine’s folklore, now more than ever. Its defiant defense – when a Russian warship was famously told to “go f*** yourself” – and then reconquest rallied a nation in the early months of the conflict with Russia, puncturing the myth of the invaders’ superiority.

Now, whipped by winter winds, it remains firmly in Ukrainian hands – a speck of rock that has both symbolic and strategic significance.

A CNN team became the first foreign media to visit the island since it was recaptured in June, and to speak with the commander of the operation that led to its liberation.

A few acres of rock and grass, treeless and difficult to access, Snake Island, also known as Zmiinyi Island, lies around 30 miles (48 kilometers) off the Ukrainian coast, near its maritime border with Romania.

Getting there proved challenging: An hour being pitched from wave to wave in a small boat, showered with spray, in sub-freezing temperatures. The Black Sea can be unforgiving, and so can its hazardous coastline. On the way back our dirigible boat got stuck on a sandbar, and it took six hours before we were transferred, one-by-one, to another vessel in the darkness.

Snake Island is now a desolate place, strewn with wreckage, its few buildings reduced to shells, its half-sunken jetty battered by the tide. It’s a graveyard of expensive military hardware – and is littered with unexploded ordnance and mines. This is not a place to be careless.

The CNN team saw at least four different kinds of landmines, Russian Pantsir surface-to-air missile systems, and an almost intact Tor anti-air missile complex. There was also the carcass of a Russian military helicopter that was hit.

Wondering among the wreckage, in a surreal scene, were dozens of cats, probably the descendants of the lighthouse pets from a more peaceful time.

The scenes of wreckage on Snake Island.

Numerous cats, likely former lighthouse pets, roam around the rocky terrain.

A Russian "Tor" missile system on the island. Russians troops disabled it before leaving.

Ukraine keeps a small military presence on the island as an observation mission. One of that detachment is actually Russian, a volunteer with the Ukrainian forces who goes by the call-sign Fortuna.

He’d been living with his family in Ukraine. “And here comes Russia attacking us. If some other country had attacked us we’d fight too.”

Nowadays, he says, the Russians aren’t doing much attacking, at least in this corner of Ukraine.

“At this stage the Russians only perform air strikes,” Fortuna told CNN. “So we can hear them coming. Plus we have observers all along the perimeter and we receive intelligence. So usually we are warned about a possible attack.”

Occasionally they will see a Russian warship in the distance.

“We need to be on guard 24/7 so we never get bored. There is always something to get busy with,” Fortuna says.

The troops here can’t communicate with their families. Even when there is a signal, turning on your phone invites a strike. The small boats used to ferry supplies are often unable to make the trip, so a rotation here can get extended by the elements, sometimes for a week.

An emblem of resistance

Snake Island fell in the first few days of the invasion in February, as Ukraine struggled on multiple fronts against Russian forces. But before it did, there was a show of defiance that immediately became a meme for Ukraine’s determined resistance.

Ordered to surrender by an approaching Russian vessel, one of the small detachment there responded by radio: “Russian warship: Go f*** yourself.”

Those words were echoed on everything from T-shirts to postage stamps and road signs.

One of the small detachment on the island told CNN it was a pivotal moment, encouraging people to fight and volunteer.

Ukrainian troops on Snake Island.

The man who led the operation to expel the Russians from the island, after they occupied it for several months, cannot reveal his real name. As an officer in military intelligence he goes by the call-sign Shakespeare.

“There are just four or five officers like me in Ukraine,” he told CNN. “if I give any details, everybody will recognize me.”

But he did provide a detailed account of the plan to retake the island, which was successful by the end of June.

Much of the hard work was done in May, when exposed Russian positions were targeted. “It was all about choosing the right kind of artillery and combination of artillery,” Shakespeare said.

“The Russians made a mistake in estimating we cannot reach them there. They thought we could only fire multiple rocket launchers at them, so they installed anti-air systems on the island. They were able to intercept our rockets, but we used complex strikes.”

“They just lost manpower and lots of expensive vehicles for nothing. This was their main mistake.”

French-made CAESARS as well as Grad rocket launchers were used, he said, though he was less complimentary about the Ukrainian-developed Bogdana howitzer, which has a range of 40 kilometers (25 miles).

“It was breaking more than firing,” Shakespeare told CNN.

A military officer told CNN that Ukraine recaptured Snake Island after the Russians "lost manpower" and "expensive vehicles."

They were plenty of challenges, particularly as launching artillery across the sea is nothing like firing it across land. “Different conditions, so aiming is complicated,” he added. Reconnaissance drones helped make the artillery fire more accurate.

The Ukrainians also used the Turkish-supplied Bayrakhtar drone before the Russians introduced electronic warfare measures and air defenses on the island.

But the Russians had to ship equipment from Sevastopol in Crimea to defend the island. And that was their second mistake, Shakespeare said. This was a long and exposed supply line vulnerable to Ukrainian anti-ship missiles.

Shakespeare recalled the initial landing at the end of June, after Russian positions had been pummeled.

“It was a unit from Special Ops Forces and deminers from the marine corps. Combat swimmers, divers. They checked water for the mines. Then others could approach the island on the vessels.”

Unexploded ordnance and mines litter the rocky island.

What they found was a deserted scrap yard.

“There was nobody there … They left in a hurry leaving behind ammunition and equipment.”

That included the nearly intact Tor complex. “If they’d had the time, they would have blown it up,” Shakespeare added.

Besides the huge boost to Ukrainian morale, the recapture of Snake Island had a strategic purpose.

“Controlling Snake Island allows you to control the mouth of Danube. Without securing (the) island signing the grain deal would have been impossible,” Shakespeare said, referring to the UN-brokered grain initiative agreed in July that allowed Ukraine to restart exports through the Black Sea.

Our visit is necessarily brief. Our hosts don’t want Russia to have the time to plan something and the weather is deteriorating. In the slate-gray of the winter afternoon we are whisked away for our rendezvous with the sandbar.

But the mystery of the island stays with you. It is reputed to be the burial place of Achilles and once had a Greek temple. It was fought over by the Russian and Ottoman empires. It seems that every crag and cave hides a story.

Now there is a modern legend to add to those fables.

China could see nearly a million deaths as it exits zero-Covid, study says

Hong Kong
CNN
 — 
China’s abrupt and under-prepared exit from zero-Covid could lead to nearly 1 million deaths, according to a new study, as the country braces for an unprecedented wave of infections spreading out from its biggest cities to its vast rural areas.

For nearly three years, the Chinese government has used strict lockdowns, centralized quarantines, mass testing and rigorous contact tracing to curb the spread of the virus. That costly strategy was abandoned earlier this month, following an explosion of protests across the country against stringent restrictions that have upended businesses and daily life.

But experts have warned that the country is poorly prepared for such a drastic exit, having fallen short on bolstering the elderly vaccination rate, upping surge and intensive care capacity in hospitals, and stockpiling antiviral medications.

Under the current conditions, a nationwide reopening could result in up to 684 deaths per million people, according to the projections by three professors at the University of Hong Kong.

Given China’s population of 1.4 billion people, that would amount to 964,400 deaths.

The surge of infections would “likely overload many local health systems across the country,” said the research paper, released last week on the Medrxiv preprint server and which has yet to undergo peer review.

Simultaneously lifting restrictions in all provinces would lead to hospitalization demands 1.5 to 2.5 times of surge hospital capacity, according to the study.

But this worst case scenario could be avoided if China rapidly rolls out booster shots and antiviral drugs.

With fourth-dose vaccination coverage of 85% and antiviral coverage of 60%, the death toll can be reduced by 26% to 35%, according to the study, which is funded partly by the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the Hong Kong government.

A health worker waits for people to take swab samples to test for Covid-19 in Shanghai on December 19, 2022.

On Monday, Chinese health authorities announced two Covid deaths, both in the capital Beijing, which is grappling with its worst outbreak since the start of the pandemic.

They were the first officially reported deaths since the dramatic easing of restrictions on December 7, although Chinese social media posts have pointed to a surge in demand at Beijing’s funeral homes and crematoriums in recent weeks.

An employee at a funeral home on the outskirts of Beijing told CNN they were swamped by the long queues for cremation, and customers would need to wait until at least the next day to cremate their loved ones.

On Baidu, China’s dominant online search engine, searches for “funeral homes” by Beijing residents have hit a record high since the pandemic began.

Other major cities are also facing a surge in infections. In the financial hub of Shanghai, schools have moved most classes online starting from Monday. In the southern metropolis of Guangzhou, authorities have told students that are already taking online classes and pre-schoolers not to prepare for a return to school.

In the megacity of Chongqing in the southwest, authorities announced on Sunday that public sector workers testing positive for Covid can go to work “as normal” – a remarkable turnaround for a city that only weeks ago had been in the throes of a mass lockdown.

It is difficult to judge the true scale of the outbreak by official numbers. China stopped reporting asymptomatic cases last week, conceding it was no longer possible to track the actual number of infections. These asymptomatic cases used to account for the bulk of the country’s official caseload. But the rest of the case count has been rendered meaningless too, as cities roll back mass testing and allow people to use antigen tests and isolate at home.

Chinese experts have warned that the worst is yet to come. Wu Zunyou, the chief epidemiologist at the Chinese CDC, said the country is being hit by the first of three expected waves of infections this winter.

Speaking at a conference in Beijing on Saturday, Wu said the current wave would run until mid-January. The second wave is expected to last from late January to mid-February next year, triggered by the mass travel ahead of the Lunar New Year holiday, which falls on January 21.

Every year, hundreds of millions of people who have left their hometowns to build a life in China’s fast growing cities pour into trains, buses and planes to see their family – a weeks-long travel rush known as the largest annual human migration on Earth.

For three consecutive years, these homecoming trips have been discouraged by authorities under the zero-Covid policy. And experts warn that with domestic travel restrictions lifted, the virus could sweep through China’s countryside, where vaccination rates are lower and medical resources are lacking.

A third wave of cases would run from late February to mid-March as people returned to work after the week-long holiday, Wu said.

World Cup champion Argentina returns home to a jubilant Buenos Aires

Buenos Aires, Argentina
CNN
 — 
Argentina’s World Cup-winning squad arrived home to a jubilant Buenos Aires on Tuesday as millions of people lined the streets and celebrated their champions’ return.

On arriving in the country on Tuesday morning, team Captain Lionel Messi stepped off the plane first, holding the gold trophy aloft, followed by his triumphant team onto a red carpet at the airport.

As the team bus departed the airport, it was immediately swarmed by cheering supporters dressed in the national colors of blue and white. Videos show the bus inching forward slowly behind a police escort, surrounded by tens of thousands of people waving the Argentine flag and setting off firecrackers in the night.

The air was filled with cheers as the crowd sang and danced; the players, standing on the open top deck, waved to their adoring supporters.

The Argentina football team on a bus in Buenos Aires on December 20, surrounded by cheering fans.

Hundreds of thousands of fans are expected to take to the streets and celebrate.

Some 4 million people came out to see the victory parade in the capital, state media agency Télam reported, citing police. Tuesday had been declared a national holiday following the team’s thrilling penalty shootout victory over France in Qatar on Sunday.

The bus carrying the entire team was meant to make its way to the Obelisk, a historic monument in the center of Buenos Aires, but was not able to progress due to the swarming crowds, Claudio ‘Chiqui’ Tapia, the president of the Argentine Football Association said Tuesday.

Aerial view of fans of Argentina gathering at the Obelisk as they wait for the team's victory parade.

Argentina players celebrate on the bus with the World Cup trophy during Tuesday's parade.

“They won’t let us go to greet all the people who were at the Obelisk, the same security agencies that escorted us, won’t allow us to move forward,” Tapia said, “A thousand apologies on behalf of all the champion players.”

A helicopter including Messi, teammate Rodrigo De Paul and Argentina coach Lionel Scaloni flew over the crowds, police said Tuesday, soaring over the parade before being flown back to the the football association’s training site in Ezeiza, on the city’s outskirts.

The team will spend the night at the Argentine Football Association’s training facility, according to Télam.

Argentina fans celebrate the national team's arrival in Buenos Aires.

Crowds of supporters had camped out at the training site on Monday ahead of the team’s arrival, with photos showing fans spilling out of cars parked on its grounds. Some laid on blankets on the grass while others lounged on picnic chairs around coolers.

The team’s highly-anticipated return continues several days of nonstop celebration across the country and among fans overseas, following Argentina’s explosive win against France.

Lionel Messi leads the Argentina team as they step off the plane in Buenos Aires on December 20.

Argentina players wave from the top of a bus after their arrival in Buenos Aires.

Superstars Messi and Kylian Mbappé faced off on the pitch, in what has widely been called the greatest World Cup final of all time.

Mbappé was defending France’s 2018 win at the tournament in Russia, while 35-year-old Messi was playing in what may be his final World Cup match, looking to claim the trophy which had eluded him for so long.

Argentina took an early lead in the first half – but France roared back in the second half, reaching a 2-2 tie that forced the match into extra time.

Fans gather outside the Argentine Football Association's training ground ahead of the team's arrival.

Argentina fans wave flags outside the national men's team training ground ahead of their arrival in Buenos Aires.

Messi scored his second goal of the match to restore his team’s lead – but Mbappé scored a second penalty to grab his hat-trick and take the final to a penalty shootout, which ended with triumph for Argentina after France missed two shots.

Hundreds of thousands of people poured onto the streets of Buenos Aires after the World Cup triumph, flooding the central 9 de Julio Avenue. Social media videos showed jubilant fans climbing on top of street poles to wave the Argentine flag; others on the ground danced, sang and chanted in celebration.

Fans climbed up high to try and get a view of the Argentina bus.

Cristina Sille/Reuters
The triumph in Doha was Argentina’s third World Cup win and its first since 1986, when the legendary Diego Maradona led the team to victory in Mexico.

Sunday’s win also marked a change in fortunes for Argentina after three recent defeats in major finals – the 2014 World Cup, and the Copa America in 2015 and 2016.

Fans gather in Buenos Aires on December 19.

Those losses prompted Messi at one point to announce his retirement from international football – though the almost-unanimous national outcry convinced him to reverse track, before wining the Copa América in 2021.

Now, with the World Cup also under his belt, Messi has cemented his status as one of the all-time soccer greats alongside Maradona and Brazil’s Pelé.

People of all ages were able to celebrate as Tuesday was made a national holiday.

“I cannot believe that we have suffered so much in a perfect game. Unbelievable, but this team responds to everything,” said Scaloni after the match Sunday, according to Reuters.

“I am proud of the work they did,” he added, fighting back tears as he was embraced by his players. “I want to tell people to enjoy, it’s a historic moment for our country.”

Higher mortgage rates depress U.S. single-family housing starts, building permits

Residential single-family homes construction by KB Home are shown under construction in the community of Valley Center, California, U.S. June 3, 2021. REUTERS/Mike Blake

Housing starts fall 0.5% in November
Single-family starts drop 4.1%; multi-family up 4.8%
Building permits plunge 11.2%; single-family fall 7.1%

WASHINGTON, Dec 20 (Reuters) - U.S. single-family homebuilding tumbled to a 2-1/2-year low in November and permits for future construction plunged as higher mortgage rates continued to depress housing market activity.

The dour report from the Commerce Department on Tuesday followed on the heels of news on Monday that confidence among homebuilders plummeted for a record 12th month in December.

It put residential investment on track to contract for the seventh consecutive quarter, which would be the longest such stretch since the collapse of the housing bubble triggered the Great Recession. The housing market has borne the brunt of the Federal Reserve's fastest interest rate-hiking cycle since the 1980s as the U.S. central bank wages war against inflation.

"The Fed's rate hikes are doing what they are supposed to, further deepening the recession in the residential housing construction markets," said Christopher Rupkey, chief economist at FWDBONDS in New York. "There's nowhere for homebuilders to hide. We don't know about the rest of the economy, but the housing market is clearly in recession."

Single-family housing starts, which account for the biggest share of homebuilding, dropped 4.1% to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 828,000 units last month. That was the lowest level since May 2020, when the economy was reeling from the first wave of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Outside the pandemic plunge, single-family starts are the weakest since February 2019. Single-family homebuilding decreased in the South and Midwest, generally considered as the more affordable regions of the United States. It increased in the Northeast and West.

Starts for housing projects with five units or more surged 4.8% to a rate of 584,000 units, the highest level since April.

Multi-family housing construction is being driven by strong demand for rental accommodation as the higher mortgage rates force many potential homebuyers to remain renters.

The 30-year fixed mortgage rate surged to above 7% a few months ago, the highest since 2002, according to data from mortgage finance agency Freddie Mac. Though the rate has since retreated to an average of 6.31% last week, it is double what it was that time a year ago.

Rates could start pushing higher after the Fed last week signaled additional rate increases by the end of 2023, sending Treasury yields soaring. Mortgage rates move in tandem with Treasury yields.

Stocks on Wall Street were trading higher. The dollar fell against a basket of currencies after the Bank of Japan stunned markets by deciding to review its yield curve control policy and widen the trading band for the 10-year government bond yield. U.S. Treasury yields rose.

SINKING CONFIDENCE
Data on Monday showed confidence among single-family homebuilders sinking further in November, pushing the National Association of Home Builders (NAHB)/Wells Fargo housing market index to the lowest level since June 2012, excluding the tumble during the early days of the pandemic in the spring of 2020.

The jump in multi-family housing projects offset some of the drag from single-family housing units, resulting in overall housing starts falling only 0.5% to a rate of 1.427 million units last month. Economists polled by Reuters had forecast starts would slide to a rate of 1.400 million units.

The Fed is seeking to slow inflation by bringing down demand for everything from housing to labor. The labor market has remained tight, but economists expect it to start loosening and eventually weaken next year, driven by the housing market.

The housing market has contracted for six straight quarters. Residential investment is expected to cut off as much as 0.7 percentage point from gross domestic product this quarter.

Growth estimates for the fourth quarter are as high as a 2.8% annualized rate. The economy grew at a 2.9% pace in the third quarter.

"Housing will play a major role in the coming slowdown in the job market," said Gus Faucher, chief economist at PNC Financial in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. "Employment in residential construction, after rebounding quickly from the pandemic, has essentially been flat over the past half-year."

The single-family housing market boomed early in the pandemic as Americans sought bigger properties to accommodate home offices. The pendulum has now swung in favor of apartments.

But multi-family housing is starting to show some cracks. Permits for housing projects with five units or more dropped 17.9% to a rate of 509,000 units, the lowest level since May 2021. Single-family building permits plunged 7.1% to a rate of 781,000 units, the lowest level since May 2020.

Overall, permits for future home construction plunged 11.2% to a rate of 1.342 million units last month, the lowest level since June 2020.

The number of houses approved for construction that are yet to be started fell 2.0% to 293,000 units. The single-family homebuilding backlog decreased 3.4% to 143,000 units, but the completions rate for this segment increased 9.5% to a rate of 1.047 million units.

The inventory of single-family housing under construction fell 1.3% to a rate of 777,000 million units, the lowest level since December 2021.

The combination of higher mortgage rates, declining single-family homebuilding and inventory could worsen an existing housing shortage and the slow the pace of house price decreases, posing a conundrum for the Fed.

"The limited available inventory fueled by both existing homeowners and homebuilders will keep the market tight, price declines minimal, and competition for desirable homes alive," said Nicole Bachaud, an economist at Zillow in Seattle.

Elon Musk actively searching for a new Twitter CEO, sources say

Twitter owner and CEO Elon Musk is searching for a new chief executive of the company, sources told CNBC’s David Faber.
Musk, who acquired the company for $44 billion in October, has previously said his position as CEO would be temporary.
However, on Sunday, he wrote in a tweet that “there is no successor.”

Elon Musk Twitter page seen on mobile with his poll to step down as head of Twitter

Twitter
 owner and CEO Elon Musk is searching for a new chief executive of the company, sources told CNBC’s David Faber.

Musk, who acquired the company for $44 billion in October, has previously said his position as CEO would be temporary. In court in November, Musk said, “I expect to reduce my time at Twitter and find somebody else to run Twitter over time.” However, on Sunday, he wrote in a tweet that “there is no successor.”

“The question is not finding a CEO, the question is finding a CEO who can keep Twitter alive,” he wrote.

The billionaire posted an informal poll Sunday asking Twitter users if he should step down as head of the company, and a majority of the 17 million respondents voted for Musk to leave his post. He said Sunday he would abide by the results of the poll.

Twitter polls are straw polls, which means they are not comparable to professional public opinion research. Malicious bots or inauthentic accounts may also be able to register a response to a Twitter poll.

Sources told Faber that Musk’s search for a new CEO has been ongoing and began before the Twitter poll was made.

Musk’s Twitter takeover has been rocky, as his leadership has resulted in massive staff cuts, a spike in racist hate speech, advertisers fleeing or slashing their spending on the platform, as well as the reinstatement of previously banned accounts.

The “Chief Twit,” as Musk has previously called himself, claims that Twitter usage has reached an all-time high since he took over, and that hate speech impressions have fallen.

The billionaire’s management of Twitter has raised concerns about his other ventures.

Musk has sold billions of dollars worth of Tesla shares this year to finance the Twitter takeover. He has also pulled in talent from Tesla, SpaceX and the Boring Co., including executives, engineers and attorneys, to assist him at Twitter. Musk is CEO of Tesla and SpaceX and founder of the Boring Co.

On Monday, Sen. Elizabeth Warren, D-Mass., wrote to the chair of Tesla’s board, Robyn Denholm, expressing concern that Musk and the board may have violated legal obligations to Tesla shareholders.

The lawmaker, who has sparred with Musk in the past over the idea of a wealth tax, asked the board to answer specific questions about the alleged misappropriation of Tesla resources and conflicts of interest resulting from Musk’s purchase of Twitter.

In a tweet Monday night, Musk said “the United States has definitely been harmed” by having Warren as a senator. A representative for Warren did not immediately respond to requests for comment.

Earlier this month, NASA Administrator Bill Nelson asked SpaceX President and COO Gwynne Shotwell whether Musk’s “distraction” at Twitter might affect SpaceX’s work with the space agency, NBC News reported. Nelson said she reassured him it would not.

Musk did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

Bill Gates: ‘Our grandchildren will grow up in a world that is dramatically worse off’ if we don’t fix climate change

Bill Gates funds climate adaptation through his namesake philanthropic venture, the Gates Foundation, and he invests in climate tech companies through his investment firm, Breakthrough Energy Ventures.
“Getting to zero will be the hardest thing humans have ever done,” Gates writes in his year-end letter published Tuesday. “We need to revolutionize the entire physical economy—how we make things, move around, produce electricity, grow food, and stay warm and cool—in less than three decades.”
The bad news is that greenhouse gas emissions are still increasing. The good news, writes Gates, is that investment in climate tech solutions is exceeding his expectations.

Microsoft Corp co-founder Bill Gates delivers his speech at the National Assembly on August 16, 2022 in Seoul, South Korea.

The idea of becoming a grandparent is emotional for Bill Gates to even write about.

“I started looking at the world through a new lens recently — when my older daughter gave me the incredible news that I’ll become a grandfather next year,” Gates wrote in a letter published overnight on his personal blog, Gates Notes.

Gates’ 26-year-old daughter, Jennifer, and her husband, Nayel Nassar, are expecting their first baby in 2023.

“Simply typing that phrase, ‘I’ll become a grandfather next year,’ makes me emotional,” wrote the 67-year-old billionaire philanthropist, who earned his fortune from co-founding Microsoft
 in the 1970s. “And the thought gives a new dimension to my work. When I think about the world my grandchild will be born into, I’m more inspired than ever to help everyone’s children and grandchildren have a chance to survive and thrive.”

Gates goes on to summarize the work his namesake philanthropic organization, the Gates Foundation, is doing for children living in global poverty, to improve education, pandemic preparedness, and the fights against polio and AIDS.

Gates also talks about the work he is doing to combat climate change, both through the Gates Foundation by supporting early stage climate companies with his investment firm, Breakthrough Energy Ventures.

Current leaders’ response to climate change will impact future generations, which is the first point Gates makes in the section of his letter where he addresses climate change.

“I can sum up the solution to climate change in two sentences: We need to eliminate global emissions of greenhouse gases by 2050,” Gates writes. “Extreme weather is already causing more suffering, and if we don’t get to net-zero emissions, our grandchildren will grow up in a world that is dramatically worse off.”

Getting to zero will be the hardest thing humans have ever done.
The implications are enormous — and so is the challenge.

“Getting to zero will be the hardest thing humans have ever done,” Gates writes. “We need to revolutionize the entire physical economy — how we make things, move around, produce electricity, grow food, and stay warm and cool — in less than three decades.”

Gates got started in working on climate change when he learned about the struggles of small farmers in countries where his namesake philanthropic organization was doing work. The Gates Foundation funds climate adaptation work, helping people adjust to the implications of a warming world, where there is no profit to be made by a commercial enterprise.

“It starts from the idea that the poorest are suffering the most from climate change, but businesses don’t have a natural incentive to make tools that help them,” Gates writes.

“A seed company can earn profits from, say, a new type of tomato that’s a nicer shade of red and doesn’t bruise easily, but it has no incentive to make better strains of cassava that (a) survive floods and droughts and (b) are cheap enough for the world’s low-income farmers,” Gates writes. “The foundation’s role is to make sure that the poorest benefit from the same innovative skills that benefit richer countries.”

Not all of Gates’ climate work is philanthropic. Breakthrough Energy Ventures funds early stage companies that are working to build and grow companies to decarbonize various sectors of the economy. Building for-profit companies to address a problem that impacts the well-being of the global population may come across as unsavory from Gates, who already has a fortune to his name — $103.6 billion according to Forbes as of Monday.

But Gates says decarbonizing global industry is too large a problem even for his deep pockets.

“Philanthropy alone can’t eliminate greenhouse gases. Only markets and governments can achieve that kind of pace and scale,” Gates said. Any profits Gates makes on investments he makes in Breakthrough Energy companies will go back into climate work or into the philanthropic foundation, he said.

Plus, if companies working to address climate change can be self-sustaining, that will encourage other investors to put money into them.

“Companies need to be profitable so they can grow, keep running, and prove that there’s a market for their products,” Gates writes. “The profit incentive will attract other innovators, creating competition that will drive down the prices of zero-emissions inventions and have a meaningful impact on emissions from buildings.”

Greenhouse gas emissions still increasing
The bad news is that greenhouse gas emissions are still increasing.

“Unfortunately, on near-term goals, we’re falling short. Between 2021 and 2022, global emissions actually rose from 51 billion tons of carbon equivalents to 52 billion tons,” Gates writes.

On Monday, the secretary-general of the United Nations also underscored the grim reality of the current moment in climate change.

“We are still moving in the wrong direction,” António Guterres said Monday. “The global emissions gap is growing. The 1.5-degree goal is gasping for breath. National climate plans are falling woefully short.”

Despite the bleakness of the current climate moment, Gates is optimistic about the rising investment in decarbonization technologies.

“We’re much further along than I would have predicted a few years ago on getting companies to invest in zero-carbon breakthroughs,” Gates writes.

Public money for climate research and development has gone up by one-third since the 2015 Paris climate accord, and in the United States, laws passed this year will put $500 billion toward moving the U.S. energy infrastructure away from fossil fuel-based sources, according to Gates.

Private money is also going into climate technologies at a good clip. Venture capital firms have put $70 billion in clean energy startups in the past two years, Gates writes.

U.S. payrolls surged by 261,000 in October, better than expected as hiring remains strong

Nonfarm payrolls grew by 261,000 in October, better than the estimate for 205,000.
The unemployment rate moved higher to 3.7%, while a broader jobless measure also increased, to 6.8%.
Big job gainers by industry included health care, professional and technical services, and leisure and hospitality.
Average hourly earnings rose 0.4% for the month and were up 4.7% from a year ago.
Job growth was stronger than expected in October despite Federal Reserve interest rate increases aimed at slowing what is still a relatively strong labor market.

Nonfarm payrolls grew by 261,000 for the month while the unemployment rate moved higher to 3.7%, the Labor Department reported Friday. Those payroll numbers were better than the Dow Jones estimate for 205,000 more jobs, but worse than the 3.5% estimate for the unemployment rate.

Although the number was better than expected, it still marked the slowest pace of job gains since December 2020.

Stocks rose following the nonfarm payrolls release, while Treasury yields also were higher.

U.S. monthly job creation in the last year

Average hourly earnings grew 4.7% from a year ago and 0.4% for the month, indicating that wage growth is still likely to serve as a price pressure as worker pay is still well short of the rate of inflation. The yearly growth met expectations while the monthly gain was slightly ahead of the 0.3% estimate.

“There has been some signs of cooling. Bur are seeing a pretty strong labor market,” said Elise Gould, senior economist at the Economic Policy Institute. “We did see a substantial increase in jobs. But there’s been a slowdown in the rate of increase. You would expect that as we get closer to full employment.”

Market pricing shifted slightly toward a 0.5 percentage point Fed rate hike in December, which would be less aggressive than the pace that began in June with 0.75 percentage point moves at each meeting. Traders expect the Fed to enact another 0.5 percentage point increase in February.

Health care biggest growth area
Health care led job gains, adding 53,000 positions, while professional and technical services contributed 43,000, and manufacturing grew by 32,000.

Leisure and hospitality also posted solid growth, up 35,000 jobs, though the pace of increases has slowed considerably from the gains posted in 2021. The group, which includes hotel, restaurant and bar jobs along with related sectors, is averaging gains of 78,000 a month this year, compared with 196,000 last year.

Heading into the holiday shopping season, retail posted only a modest gain of 7,200 jobs. Wholesale trade added 15,000, while transportation and warehousing was up 8,000.

“Job gains were fairly widespread, and overall wage gains are still too high,” said Marvin Loh, senior global macro strategist at State Street. “So, steady as she goes from a Fed perspective, but incrementally, there’s reason to have a little hope that we’re starting to see some of the froth come out of the [jobs] market.”

The unemployment rate rose 0.2 percentage point even though the labor force participation rate declined by one-tenth of a point to 62.2%. An alternative measure of unemployment, which includes discouraged workers and those holding part-time jobs for economic reasons, also edged higher to 6.8%.

September’s jobs number was revised higher, to 315,000, an increase of 52,000 from the original estimate. August’s number moved lower by 23,000 to 292,000.

The new figures come as the Fed is on a campaign to bring down inflation running at an annual rate of 8.2%, according to one government gauge. Earlier this week, the central bank approved its fourth consecutive 0.75 percentage point interest rate increase, taking benchmark borrowing rates to a range of 3.75%-4%.

Signs of slowing

Those hikes are aimed in part at cooling a labor market where there are still nearly two jobs for every available unemployed worker. Even with the reduced pace, job growth has been well ahead of its pre-pandemic level, in which monthly payroll growth averaged 164,000 in 2019.

But Tom Porcelli, chief U.S. economist at RBC Capital Markets, said the broader picture is of a slowly deteriorating labor market.

“This thing doesn’t fall of a cliff. It’s a grind into a slower backdrop,” he said. “It works this way every time. So the fact that people want to hang their hat on this lagging indicator to determine where we are going is sort of laughable.”

Indeed, there have been signs of cracks lately.

Amazon
 on Thursday said it is pausing hiring for roles in its corporate workforce, an announcement that came after the online retail behemoth said it was halting new hires for its corporate retail jobs.

Also, Apple
 said it will be freezing new hires except for research and development. Ride-hailing company Lyft
 reported it will be slicing 13% of its workforce, while online payments company Stripe said it is cutting 14% of its workers.

Fed Chairman Jerome Powell on Wednesday characterized the labor market as “overheated” and said the current pace of wage gains is “well above” what would be consistent with the central bank’s 2% inflation target.

“Demand is still strong,” said Amy Glaser, senior vice president of business operations at Adecco, a staffing and recruiting firm. “Everyone is anticipating at some point that we’ll start to see a shift in demand. But so far we’re continuing to see the labor market defying the law of supply and demand.”

Glaser said demand is especially strong in warehousing, retail and hospitality, the sector hardest hit by the Covid pandemic. She added that Adecco is seeing an increase in workers looking for second jobs.

Ambulance strike causing deep worry, say NHS bosses

Health bosses have warned they cannot guarantee patient safety during strikes by thousands of ambulance workers in England and Wales on Wednesday.

But NHS England says emergency care will continue to be provided.

Ambulance response times are already twice as long as two years ago and there is huge pressure on A&Es.

People are being asked to use services "wisely" and only call 999 in a life-threatening emergency - with 111 online the first port of call.

No industrial action is taking place in Northern Ireland and Scotland, and there will be no strikes in the east of England or the Isle of Wight.

But elsewhere, there is likely to be major disruption as paramedics, call handlers, emergency care assistants and technicians go on strike.

What calls will ambulances answer on strike day?
Sunak refusing to budge on pay as strikes escalate
Around 750 armed forces staff are being drafted in to cover the walkouts in England and Wales.

However, their role will be limited - they won't be sent on call-outs involving critical care and they won't provide any clinical care.

What do I do if I'm hurt?
Patients who are seriously ill or injured, or whose lives are in danger, are being advised by the NHS to call 999.

For all other healthcare needs, the NHS is advising people to contact NHS 111 online or via the NHS 111 helpline, or to contact their local GP or pharmacy.

In a letter to the prime minister, the NHS Confederation, which represents healthcare systems in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, said there was now "deep worry among NHS leaders about the level of harm and risk that could occur to patients tomorrow and beyond".

"This is not something NHS leaders would ever say lightly," the letter stated, "but many now tell us that they cannot guarantee patient safety tomorrow".

The letter has now also been signed by NHS Providers, the body which represents hospital trusts, mental health and ambulance services.

What's happening in my area?
Not all unions are striking for the same hours on Wednesday, and it is difficult to say how many workers at each individual service will strike.

You can use our interactive tool to find out which unions are on strike at your local ambulance service:

Are unions on strike at your ambulance service?
Ambulance services affected by strike action on 21 December
Source: GMB, Unison, Unite
Note: Not all ambulance workers are involved in strike action across all unions. Union membership is not evenly distributed across all services, so disruption may vary. *More than 10,000 workers in total across all areas. **More than 1,600 workers in total across all areas. ***Number of workers involved unclear
The industrial action by ambulance workers follows two days of strikes by nurses this month over pay. It has also been some of the busiest months on record for people attending Accident and Emergency departments.

Long waits for ambulances after an emergency 999 call have become a regular occurrence, as have queues of ambulances outside A&E waiting to offload patients.

Rachel Harrison, national secretary of the GMB Union, said ambulance staff were tired of going to work and spending all day in an ambulance outside a hospital with a patient because of delays in handing over patients to A&E.

She said they were "being physically prevented from carrying out their jobs" and did not know if patients would "still be alive" when they reached them after a callout.

"We've been raising these issues for years and [have] been ignored," she added.

Why are nurses and ambulance staff striking?
My mum's 40-hour wait to get to A&E with hip break
Ambulance workers are asking for a pay rise above inflation - although not a precise figure - and a plan for recouping lost earnings over many years.

Health Secretary Steve Barclay met union representatives on Tuesday afternoon but there were no discussions around pay - only what care would still be provided during the strike.

After the meeting, Mr Barclay tweeted that union demands for higher pay were "unaffordable during these challenging times", but he said he was "open to engaging with unions on how to make the NHS a better place to work".

"My priority remains patient safety. We have contingency plans in place and I have met with ambulance union reps today, urging them to honour their commitment to provide responses to life-threatening emergency calls," he said.

Onay Kasab, Unite's national lead officer, said the meeting was "entirely pointless" because the health secretary had refused to discuss the key issue - pay.

And Christina McAnea from Unison said there was "no movement", adding she was "very disappointed" the strike would go ahead.

Prime Minister Rishi Sunak has insisted he will not back down against striking workers. He has said the best way to help the workforce would be to reduce inflation as quickly as possible.

One Conservative MP said the prime minister must show some flexibility, and accused the of government "parroting" the decision of the pay review boards.

MP Sir Geoffrey Clifton-Brown said: "These things have got to be solved by negotiation. There are people who are desperately likely to need this service over Christmas."

NHS England says it has increased the number of staff answering 999 calls and is helping individual trusts speed up the process of handing over emergency patients and discharging those who are well enough to go home.

Earlier on Tuesday, health minister Will Quince urged people to think again about contact sports and unnecessary car journeys during the ambulance strike.

Wales's health minister Eluned Morgan also urged people not to "add extra pressure", warning that crews would only be able to respond to the most urgent calls.

London Ambulance Service is testing out an alternative way of doing things on Wednesday - instead of dispatching an ambulance to all 999 callouts, they are going to have a team of clinicians call patients back to see if they can be helped in other ways.

For those who do need an ambulance, there will be 200 vehicles compared to the normal 400. And most of those will be staffed by a member of the military, with a clinician alongside that may or may not be a paramedic. The service says it may also use taxis for some patients.

Chief executive Daniel Elkeles said: "If that resource is not enough to get to all of the life-threatening emergencies, then our staff from the picket lines will go and respond."

He said Wednesday was going to be a "very difficult day" because they were already extremely busy.

But he said he was confident "we'll be able to get to everyone who has a life-threatening emergency in London tomorrow".

Five ambulance services declared critical incidents on Tuesday - North East Ambulance Service, South East Coast Ambulance Service, the East of England Ambulance Service, Yorkshire Ambulance Service and South Central Ambulance Service - because of pressure on services.

A critical incident allows services to prioritise certain patients and cancel non-urgent demands on staff such as training. It can happen because of a very high number of calls, for example.

Singapore's crypto ambitions shaken by FTX collapse

Singapore had been seen to be "crypto friendly" until recently

There was a time when it seemed as though Singapore would become a global centre for cryptocurrency.

Authorities had signalled an early interest in harnessing blockchain technology. That, coupled with the city state's favourable business environment, attracted digital asset companies and a burgeoning community of investors.

In 2021, investment in the industry in Singapore increased tenfold compared to the previous year to $1.48bn (£1.2bn), according to KPMG, making up nearly half the Asia Pacific total for the year.

2022 could not have been more different.

Crypto assets and companies - many with links to Singapore - have imploded, causing reverberations and sparking losses around the world.

First a popular token called Terra Luna collapsed, causing its sister token TerraUSD, which was largely stable, to plummet.

A few months later, Singapore-based crypto hedge fund Three Arrows filed for bankruptcy, taking down crypto exchange Voyager Digital with it. In August, crypto lender Hodlnaut became the next in a growing string of casualties.

It is thought that the closures of key market players this year has wiped out $1.5 trillion in crypto market capitalisation.

Then in November, billions were lost within a matter of days, when US crypto exchange FTX spectacularly collapsed because of a crippling liquidity crunch. FTX founder Sam Bankman-Fried has since been charged by US authorities with "one of the biggest financial frauds in US history".

FTX founder Bankman-Fried denied bail in Bahamas
The fall of ‘King of Crypto’ Sam Bankman-Fried
Crypto exchange FTX owes biggest creditors $3.1bn
For Singapore, the FTX collapse was particularly shocking. Its state investment fund Temasek had invested in the exchange, pumping in $275m over several months.

Temasek says it will write down the money, and is conducting an internal review into the investment.

The fund is worth more than $295bn and so the FTX investment makes up a small percentage of its public wealth portfolio.

But Singapore's deputy prime minister, who is also finance minister, told parliament the loss had caused reputational damage.

"The fact that other leading global institutional investors like BlackRock and Sequoia Capital also invested in FTX does not mitigate this," Lawrence Wong said.

Lawrence Wong is Singapore's finance minister and deputy prime minister
Tail investors were hurt too, and many believe the Singaporean authorities should have done more.

Nicole Yap, 26, says she didn't flinch about investing in the exchange because so many big companies were backing it. She has lost roughly $150,000 (£122,000), but feels the onus should not be on the user entirely.

"You need the regulation - the government or the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) - to say, 'these companies are good, we've seen their books,'" Ms Yap says.

"Just because there is a lot of scam in crypto, doesn't mean crypto is a scam. But users don't have a platform to find out about these things. We only have social media and crypto influencers."

The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites.
View original tweet on Twitter
Carol Lim started investing in cryptocurrency during the pandemic. The 52-year-old was hoping to make enough money to retire in the next few years.

"I invested with Hodlnaut because the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) endorsed it. In today's value, I lost about $55,000. I can only hope to get some of it back."

Hodlnaut was one of a handful of firms that was granted in-principle approval to provide digital payment services by Singapore's central bank. The licence approval was rescinded when the lender was forced to stop withdrawals because of market conditions.

"The core of the problem is that there is some misunderstanding amongst regulators. They want to attract businesses to their jurisdiction, but you need to regulate in such a way that consumers are safe," says Michael Gronager, CEO and co-founder of blockchain analysis firm Chainalysis.

Mr Gronager says that because consumers are so global these days, regulators need to decide whether to implement laws on the company - for example, giving them a licence to operate in the country - or to restrict trading access to retail investors.

FTX did not have a licence to operate in Singapore. However, MAS has said it is not possible to prevent local users from accessing overseas service providers.

"We will see fraud, fast money in the industry - that's no surprise. We see it in the internet, we see it in all sorts of traditional industries," Mr Gronager says.

Singapore had started introducing new measures even before the FTX saga, warning that the technology can be volatile and speculative. It banned crypto advertising earlier this year and is investigating a number of outlets present in the island nation.

Tom Brady and Gisele Bundchen were angel investors in FTX along with several Singaporean funds
Binance, the world's largest crypto exchange, left Singapore last year after it was put on an investor alert list for soliciting customers without the requisite licence, and offering Singapore dollar trades.

Call for tougher crypto rules after FTX collapse
'I'm waiting to get £2,000 back from crypto giant'
The crackdown has attracted criticism from industry players as a result, for instance from Brian Armstrong, co-founder and CEO of US-based crypto exchange platform Coinbase.

"Singapore wants to be a hub for Web3 (a vision of the next iteration of the internet that uses blockchains and cryptocurrencies), and then simultaneously says: 'Oh, we're not really going to allow retail trading or self-hosted wallets to be available," he said at the Singapore FinTech Festival in November.

"Those two things are incompatible in my mind," he added.

Singapore's government says it remains enthusiastic about crypto and still wants to become a virtual-asset hub, with a focus on the business and administrative side of blockchain technology.

It has vowed to contain risks, by proposing knowledge tests for retail investors before being allowed to trade, and has acknowledged this could mean retail-focused companies may move to other jurisdictions.

"Cryptocurrency platforms can collapse due to fraud, unsustainable business models, or excessive risk taking. FTX is not the first cryptocurrency platform to collapse, nor will it be the last," Mr Wong said.

"Those who trade in cryptocurrencies must be prepared to lose all their value. No amount of regulation can remove this risk."

TSB fined £49m over IT system meltdown

TSB has been fined nearly £49m for an IT meltdown in 2018 that caused chaos and left its customers unable to access online accounts for several weeks.

The UK's financial regulator said the failings were "widespread and serious" and led to "significant disruption".

The problems began in April 2018 when an attempt to move data to a new computer system went wrong.

All areas of TSB's services were affected, including branch, telephone and online banking.

The problems were not fully resolved for eight months and "a significant proportion of its 5.2 million customers were affected by the initial issues", the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) said.

It led to the departure of the bank's then chief executive Paul Pester.

Mark Steward, executive director of enforcement and market oversight at the FCA, said: "The failings in this case were widespread and serious which had a real impact on the day-to-day lives of a significant proportion of TSB's customers, including those who were vulnerable."

The FCA said TSB had paid £32.7m in compensation to customers who were affected by the problems.

TSB chief executive Robin Bulloch said: "We'd like to apologise again to TSB customers who were impacted by issues following the technology migration in 2018. We worked hard to put things right for customers then and have since transformed our business."

How it all went so wrong for TSB
The problems were triggered when TSB tried to move 1.3 billion customer records from an old system run by its former parent bank, Lloyds, to one managed by its current Spanish owner, Sabadell.

However, it proved disastrous with many customers being locked out of their accounts and some customers being given access to the confidential records of others.

Cases included people trying to complete house purchases and unsure whether they could move in. The BBC spoke to one couple who sat with a loaded removal van outside their new home waiting for funds to be released.

Another couple who were locked out of their wedding savings were forced to grovel to their DJ and wedding car provider because they were unable to pay them as the big day approached.

Businesses were also left in difficulty. Lee MacDonald, who played Zammo in children's TV show Grange Hill in the 1980s, told BBC Radio 5 live that he was "having an absolute nightmare" in his locksmith business.

Paul Pester. who was boss of the bank at the time, eventually stepped down
Shortly after the issues emerged, Mr Pester admitted to the BBC that the bank was "on our knees".

The problems continued for many weeks and TSB came under fierce criticism for the IT failings. Mr Pester was directly, and unusually, criticised by MPs for the saga.

The FCA said while data itself was transferred successfully, the IT platform "immediately experienced technical failures".

"This resulted in significant disruption to the continuity of TSB's banking services, including branch, telephone, online and mobile banking," it said.

Mr Steward added: "The firm failed to plan for the IT migration properly, the governance of the project was insufficiently robust and the firm failed to take reasonable care to organise and control its affairs responsibly and effectively, with adequate risk management systems."

TSB was fined a total of £48.65m - made up of a £29.75m penalty from the FCA and a fine of £18.9m from the Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA).

"The disruption to continuity of service experienced by TSB during its IT migration fell below the standard we expect banks to meet," said Sam Woods, the PRA's chief executive.

In February 2019, TSB said that the disastrous IT upgrade had cost it £330m, and about 80,000 customers had switched their account away from the bank in 2018.

The complexity of the switchover and the problems it caused has meant a long investigation and eventual fine by the regulator. In the meantime, there has been significant reputational damage for the bank.


